# Amateur Librarian - A Course in Critical Pedagogy

[Tomislav
Medak](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Tomislav_Medak "Tomislav Medak")
& [Marcell
Mars](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Marcell_Mars "Marcell Mars")
(Public Library project)

A proposal for a curriculum in amateur librarianship, developed through
the activities and exigencies of the Public Library project. Drawing
from a historic genealogy of public library as the institution of access
to knowledge, the proletarian tradition of really useful knowledge and
the amateur agency driven by technological development, the curriculum
covers a range of segments from immediately applicable workflows for
scanning, sharing and using e-books, over politics and tactics around
custodianship of online libraries, to applied media theory implicit in
the practices of amateur librarianship. The proposal is made with
further development, complexification and testing in mind during the
future activities of the Public Library and affiliated organizations.

## <span id="Public_library.2C_a_political_genealogy" class="mw-headline">Public library, a political genealogy</span>

Public libraries have historically achieved as an institutional space of
exemption from the commodification and privatization of knowledge. A
space where works of literature and science are housed and made
accessible for the education of every member of society regardless of
their social or economic status. If, as a liberal narrative has it,
education is a prerequisite for full participation in a body politic, it
is in this narrow institutional space that citizenship finds an
important material base for its universal realization.

The library as an institution of public access and popular literacy,
however, did not develop before a series of transformations and social
upheavals unfolded in the course of 18th and 19th century. These
developments brought about a flood of books and political demands
pushing the library to become embedded in an egalitarian and
democratizing political horizon. The historic backdrop for these
developments was the rapid ascendancy of the book as a mass commodity
and the growing importance of the reading culture in the aftermath of
the invention of the movable type print. Having emerged almost in
parallel with capitalism, by the early 18th century the trade in books
was rapidly expanding. While in the 15th century the libraries around
the monasteries, courts and universities of Western Europe contained no
more than 5 million manuscripts, the output of printing presses in the
18th century alone exploded to formidable 700 million
volumes.^[\[1\]](#cite_note-1)^ And while this provided a vector for the
emergence of a bourgeois reading public and an unprecedented expansion
of modern science, the culture of reading and Enlightenment remained
largely a privilege of the few.

Two social upheavals would start to change that. On 2 November 1789 the
French revolutionary National Assembly passed a decision to seize all
library holdings from the Church and aristocracy. Million of volumes
were transferred to the Bibliothèque Nationale and local libraries
across France. At the same time capitalism was on the rise, particularly
in England. It massively displaced the impoverished rural population
into growing urban centres, propelled the development of industrial
production and, by the mid-19th century, introduced the steam-powered
rotary press into the commercial production of books. As books became
more easily mass-produced, the commercial subscription libraries
catering to the better-off parts of society blossomed. This brought the
class aspect of the nascent demand for public access to books to the
fore.

After the failed attempt to introduce universal suffrage and end the
system of political representation based on property entitlements
through the Reform Act of 1832, the English Chartist movement started to
open reading rooms and cooperative lending libraries that would quickly
become a popular hotbed of social exchange between the lower classes. In
the aftermath of the revolutionary upheavals of 1848, the fearful ruling
classes finally consented to the demand for tax-financed public
libraries, hoping that the access to literature and edification would
after all help educate skilled workers that were increasingly in demand
and ultimately hegemonize the working class for the benefits of
capitalism's culture of self-interest and
competition.^[\[2\]](#cite_note-2)^

## <span id="Really_useful_knowledge" class="mw-headline">Really useful knowledge</span>

^[\[3\]](#cite_note-3)^

It's no surprise that the Chartists, reeling from a political defeat,
had started to open reading rooms and cooperative lending libraries. The
education provided to the proletariat and the poor by the ruling classes
of that time consisted, indeed, either of a pious moral edification
serving political pacification or of an inculcation of skills and
knowledge useful to the factory owner. Even the seemingly noble efforts
of the Society for the Diffusion of the Useful Knowledge, a Whig
organization aimed at bringing high-brow learning to the middle and
working classes in the form of simplified and inexpensive publications,
were aimed at dulling the edge of radicalism of popular
movements.^[\[4\]](#cite_note-4)^

These efforts to pacify the downtrodden masses pushed them to seek ways
of self-organized education that would provide them with literacy and
really useful knowledge – not applied, but critical knowledge that would
allow them to see through their own political and economic subjection,
develop radical politics and innovate shadow social institutions of
their own. The radical education, reliant on meagre resources and time
of the working class, developed in the informal setting of household,
neighbourhood and workplace, but also through radical press and communal
reading and discussion groups.^[\[5\]](#cite_note-5)^

The demand for really useful knowledge encompassed a critique of “all
forms of ‘provided’ education” and of the liberal conception “that
‘national education’ was a necessary condition for the granting of
universal suffrage.” Development of radical “curricula and pedagogies”
formed a part of the arsenal of “political strategy as a means of
changing the world.”^[\[6\]](#cite_note-6)^

## <span id="Critical_pedagogy" class="mw-headline">Critical pedagogy</span>

This is the context of the emergence of the public library. A historical
compromise between a push for radical pedagogy and a response to dull
its edge. And yet with the age of digitization, where one would think
that the opportunities for access to knowledge have expanded immensely,
public libraries find themselves increasingly limited in their ability
to acquire and lend both digital and paper editions. It is a sign of our
radically unequal times that the political emancipation finds itself on
a defensive fighting again for this material base of pedagogy against
the rising forces of privatization. Not only has mass education become
accessible only under the condition of high fees, student debt and
adjunct peonage, but the useful knowledge that the labour market and
reproduction of the neoliberal capitalism demands has become the one and
only rationale for education.

No wonder that over the last 6-7 years we have seen self-education,
shadow libraries and amateur librarians emerge again to counteract the
contraction of spaces of exemption that have been shrunk by austerity
and commodity.

The project Public Library was initiated with the counteraction in mind.
To help everyone learn to use simple tools to be able to act as an
Amateur Librarian – to digitize, to collect, to share, to preserve books
and articles that were unaffordable, unavailable, undesirable in the
troubled corners of the Earth we hail from.

Amateur Librarian played an important role in the narrative of Public
Library. And it seems it was successful. People easily join the project
by 'becoming' a librarian using Calibre^[\[7\]](#cite_note-7)^ and
\[let’s share books\].^[\[8\]](#cite_note-8)^ Other aspects of the
Public Library narrative add a political articulation to that simple yet
disobedient act. Public Library detects an institutional crisis in
education, an economic deadlock of austerity and a domination of
commodity logic in the form of copyright. It conjures up the amateur
librarians’ practice of sharing books/catalogues as a relevant challenge
against the convergence of that crisis, deadlock and copyright regime.

To understand the political and technological assumptions and further
develop the strategies that lie behind the counteractions of amateur
librarians, we propose a curriculum that is indebted to a tradition of
critical pedagogy. Critical pedagogy is a productive and theoretical
practice rejecting an understanding of educational process that reduces
it to a technique of imparting knowledge and a neutral mode of knowledge
acquisition. Rather, it sees the pedagogy as a broader “struggle over
knowledge, desire, values, social relations, and, most important, modes
of political agency”, “drawing attention to questions regarding who has
control over the conditions for the production of
knowledge.”^[\[9\]](#cite_note-9)^

No industry in the present demonstrates more the asymmetries of control
over the conditions of production of knowledge than the academic
publishing. The denial of access to outrageously expensive academic
publications for many universities, particularly in the Global South,
stands in stark contrast to the super-profits that a small number of
commercial publishers draws from the free labour of scientists who
write, review and edit contributions and the extortive prices their
institutional libraries have to pay for subscriptions. It is thus here
that the amateur librarianship attains its poignancy for a critical
pedagogy, inviting us to closer formulate and unfold its practices in a
shared process of discovery.

## <span id="A_curriculum" class="mw-headline">A curriculum</span>

Public library is:

-   free access to books for every member of society,
-   library catalogue,
-   librarian.

The curriculum in amateur librarianship develops aspects and
implications of this definition. Parts of this curriculum have evolved
over a number of workshops and talks previously held within the Public
Library project, parts of it are yet to evolve from a process of future
research, exchange and knowledge production in the education process.
While schematic, scaling from the immediately practical, over strategic
and tactical, to reflexive registers of knowledge, there are actual –
here unnamed – people and practices we imagine we could be learning
from.

The first iteration of this curriculum could be either a summer academy
rostered with our all-star team of librarians, designers, researchers
and teachers, or a small workshop with a small group of students delving
deeper into one particular aspect of the curriculum. In short it is an
open curriculum: both open to educational process and contributions by
others. We welcome comments, derivations and additions.

### <span id="MODULE_1:_Workflows" class="mw-headline">MODULE 1: Workflows</span>

-   from book to e-book
    -   **digitizing a book on a book scanner**
    -   **removing DRM and converting e-book formats**

<!-- -->

-   from clutter to catalogue
    -   **managing an e-book library with Calibre**
    -   **finding e-books and articles on online libraries**

<!-- -->

-   from reference to bibliography
    -   **annotating in an e-book reader device or application**
    -   **creating a scholarly bibliography in Zotero**

<!-- -->

-   from block device to network device
    -   **sharing your e-book library on a local network to a reading
        device**
    -   **sharing your e-book library on the internet with \[let’s share
        books\]**

<!-- -->

-   from private to public IP space
    -   **using \[let’s share books\] & library.memoryoftheworld.org**
    -   **using logan & jessica**
    -   **using Science Hub**
    -   **using Tor**

### <span id="MODULE_2:_Politics.2Ftactics" class="mw-headline">MODULE 2: Politics/tactics</span>

-   from developmental subordination to subaltern disobedience
    -   **uneven development & political strategies**
    -   **strategies of the developed v strategies of the
        underdeveloped : open access v piracy**

<!-- -->

-   from property to commons
    -   **from property to commons**
    -   **copyright, scientific publishing, open access**
    -   **shadow libraries, piracy, custodians.online**

<!-- -->

-   from collection to collective action
    -   **critical pedagogy & education**
    -   **archive, activation & collective action**

### <span id="MODULE_3:_Abstractions_in_action" class="mw-headline">MODULE 3: Abstractions in action</span>

-   from linear to computational
    -   **library & epistemology: catalogue, search, discovery,
        reference**
    -   **print book v e-book: page, margin, spine**

<!-- -->

-   from central to distributed
    -   **deep librarianship & amateur librarians**
    -   **network infrastructure(s)/topologies (ruling class studies)**

<!-- -->

-   from factual to fantastic
    -   **universe as library as universe**

### <span id="Reading_List" class="mw-headline">Reading List</span>

-   Mars, Marcell; Vladimir, Klemo. *Download & How to: Calibre &
    \[let’s share books\]*. Memory of the World (2014)
    <https://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2014/10/28/calibre-lets-share-books/>
-   Buringh, Eltjo; Van Zanden, Jan Luiten. *Charting the “Rise of the
    West”: Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term
    Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries*. The
    Journal of Economic History (2009)
    <http://journals.cambridge.org/article_S0022050709000837>
-   Mattern, Shannon. *Library as Infrastructure*. Places Journal (2014)
    <https://placesjournal.org/article/library-as-infrastructure/>
-   Antonić, Voja. *Our beloved bookscanner*. Memory of the World (2012)
    <https://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2012/10/28/our-beloved-bookscanner-2/>
-   Medak, Tomislav; Sekulić, Dubravka; Mertens, An. *How to:
    Bookscanning*. Memory of the World (2014)
    <https://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2014/12/08/how-to-bookscanning/>
-   Barok, Dušan. *Talks/Public Library*. Monoskop (2015)
    <http://monoskop.org/Talks/Public_Library>
-   Custodians.online. *In Solidarity with Library Genesis and Science
    Hub* (2015) <http://custodians.online>
-   Battles, Matthew. *Library: An Unquiet History* Random House (2014)
-   Harris, Michael H. *History of Libraries of the Western World*.
    Scarecrow Press (1999)
-   MayDay Rooms. *Activation* (2015)
    <http://maydayrooms.org/activation/>
-   Krajewski, Markus. *Paper Machines: About Cards & Catalogs,
    1548-1929*. MIT Press (2011)
    <https://library.memoryoftheworld.org/b/PaRC3gldHrZ3MuNPXyrh1hM1meyyaqvhaWl-HTvr53NRjJ2k>

For updates:
<https://www.zotero.org/groups/amateur_librarian_-_a_course_in_critical_pedagogy_reading_list>

1.  <div id="cite_note-1">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-1)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">For an economic history of the book in the
    Western Europe see Eltjo Buringh and Jan Luiten Van Zanden,
    “Charting the ‘Rise of the West’: Manuscripts and Printed Books in
    Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth
    Centuries,” *The Journal of Economic History* 69, No. 02 (June
    2009): 409–45, doi:10.1017/S0022050709000837, particularly
    Tables 1-5.</span>
2.  <div id="cite_note-2">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-2)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">For the social history of public library see
    Matthew Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History* (Random House, 2014)
    chapter 5: “Books for all”.</span>
3.  <div id="cite_note-3">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-3)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">For this concept we remain indebted to the
    curatorial collective What, How and for Whom/WHW, who have presented
    the work of Public Library within the exhibition *Really Useful
    Knowledge* they organized at Museo Reina Sofía in Madrid, October
    29, 2014 – February 9, 2015.</span>
4.  <div id="cite_note-4">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-4)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">“Society for the Diffusion of Useful
    Knowledge,” *Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia*, June 25, 2015,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Society_for_the_Diffusion_of_Useful_Knowledge&oldid=668644340>.</span>
5.  <div id="cite_note-5">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-5)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">Richard Johnson, “Really Useful Knowledge,”
    in *CCCS Selected Working Papers: Volume 1*, 1 edition, vol. 1
    (London u.a.: Routledge, 2014), 755.</span>
6.  <div id="cite_note-6">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-6)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">Ibid., 752.</span>
7.  <div id="cite_note-7">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-7)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"><http://calibre-ebook.com/></span>
8.  <div id="cite_note-8">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-8)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"><https://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2014/10/28/calibre-lets-share-books/></span>
9.  <div id="cite_note-9">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-9)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">Henry A. Giroux, *On Critical Pedagogy*
    (Bloomsbury Academic, 2011), 5.</span>

