# From Paper Mill to Google Data Center

[ShinJoung
Yeo](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/ShinJoung_Yeo "ShinJoung Yeo")


 Every second of every day, billions of people around the world are
googling, mapping, liking, tweeting, reading, writing, watching,
communicating, and working over the Internet. According to Cisco, global
Internet traffic will surpass one *zettabyte* – nearly a trillion
gigabytes! – in 2016, which equates to 667 trillion feature-length
films.^[\[1\]](#cite_note-ftn1-1)^ Internet traffic is expected to
double by 2019^[\[2\]](#cite_note-ftn2-2)^ as the internet ever
increasingly weaves itself into the very fabric of many people’s daily
lives.

Internet search giant Google – since August, 2015 a subsidiary of
Alphabet Inc.^[\[3\]](#cite_note-ftn3-3)^ – is one of the major conduits
of our social activities on the Web. It processes over 3.3 billion
searches each and every day, 105 billon searches per month or 1.3
trillion per year,^[\[4\]](#cite_note-ftn4-4)^ and is responsible for
over 88% Internet search activity around the
globe.^[\[5\]](#cite_note-ftn5-5)^ Predicating its business on people’s
everyday information activity – search – in 2015, Google generated
\$74.54 billion dollars,^[\[6\]](#cite_note-ftn6-6)^ equivalent to or
more than the GDP of some countries. The vast majority of Google’s
revenue – \$ 67.39 billion dollars^[\[7\]](#cite_note-ftn7-7)^ – from
advertising on its various platforms including Google search, YouTube,
AdSense products, Chrome OS, Android etc.; the company is rapidly
expanding its business to other sectors like cloud services, health,
education, self-driving cars, internet of things, life sciences, and the
like. Google’s lucrative internet business does not only generate
profits. As Google’s chief economist Hal Varian states:

> …it also generates torrents of data about users’ tastes and habits,
> data that Google then sifts and processes in order to predict future
> consumer behavior, find ways to improve its products, and sell more
> ads. This is the heart and soul of Googlenomics. It’s a system of
> constant self-analysis: a data-fueled feedback loop that defines not
> only Google’s future but the future of anyone who does business
> online.^[\[8\]](#cite_note-ftn8-8)^

Google’s business model is emblematic of the “new economy” which is
primarily built around data and information. The “new economy” – the
term popularized in the 1990s during the first dot-com boom – is often
distinguished by the mainstream discourse from the traditional
industrial economy that demands large-scale investment of physical
capital and produces material goods and instead emphasizes the unique
nature of information and purports to be less resource-intensive.
Originating in the 1960s, post-industrial theorists asserted the
emergence of the “new” economy, claiming that the increase of
highly-skilled information workers, widespread application of
information technologies, along with the decrease of manual labor, would
bring a new mode of production and fundamental changes in exploitative
capitalist social relations.^[\[9\]](#cite_note-ftn9-9)^

Has the “new” economy challenged capitalist social relations and
transcended the material world? Google and other Internet companies have
been investing heavily in industrial-scale real estate around the world
and continue to build large-scale physical infrastructure in the way of
data centers where the world’s bits and bytes are stored, processed and
delivered. The term “tube” or “cloud” or “weightless” often gives us a
façade that our newly marketed social and cultural activities over the
Internet transcend the physical realm and occur in the vapors of the
Internet; far from this perception, however, every bit of information in
the “new economy” is transmitted through and located in physical space,
on very real and very large infrastructure encomapssing existing power
structures from phone lines and fiber optics to data centers to
transnatonal underseas telecommunication cables.

There is much boosterism and celebration that the “new economy” holds
the keys to individual freedom, liberty and democratic participation and
will free labor from exploitation; however, the material/physical base
that supports the economy and our everyday lives tells a very different
story. My analysis presents an integral piece of the physical
infrastructure behind the “new economy” and the space embedded in that
infrastructure in order to elucidate that the “new economy” does not
occur in an abstract place but rather is manifested in the concrete
material world, one deeply embedded in capitalist development which
reproduces structural inequality on a global scale. Specifically, the
analysis will focus on Google’s growing large-scale data center
infrastructure that is restructuring and reconfiguring previously
declining industrial cities and towns as new production places within
the US and around the world.

Today, data centers are found in nearly every sector of the economy:
financial services, media, high-tech, education, retail, medical,
government etc. The study of the development of data centers in each of
these sectors could be separate projects in and of themselves; however,
for this project, I will only look at Google as a window into the “new”
economy, the company which has led the way in the internet sector in
building out and linking up data centers as it expands its territory of
profit.^[\[10\]](#cite_note-ftn10-10)^

## <span id="Data_Centres_in_Context" class="mw-headline">Data Centres in Context</span>

The concepts of “spatial fix” by critical geographer David
Harvey^[\[11\]](#cite_note-ftn11-11)^ and “digital capitalism” by
historian of communication and information Dan
Schiller^[\[12\]](#cite_note-ftn12-12)^ are useful to contextualize and
place the emergence of large-scale data centers within capitalist
development. Harvey illustrates the notion of spatial fix to explicate
and situate the geographical dynamics and crisis tendency of capitalism
with over-accumulation and under-consumption. Harvey’s spatial fix has
dual meanings. One meaning is that it is necessary for capital to have a
fixed space – physical infrastructure (transportation, communications,
highways, power etc.) as well as a built environment – in order to
facilitate capital’s geographical expansion. The other meaning is a fix
or solution for capitalists’ crisis through geographical expansion and
reorganization of space as capital searches for new markets and
temporarily relocates to more profitable space – new accumulation sites
and territories. This temporal spatial fix will lead capital to leave
behind existing physical infrastructure and built environments as it
shifts to new temporal fixed spaces in order to cultivate new markets.

Building on Harvey’s work, Schiller introduced the concept of digital
capitalism in response to the 1970’s crisis of capitalism in which
information became that “spatial-temporal fix” or “pole of
growth.”^[\[13\]](#cite_note-ftn13-13)^ To renew capitalist crisis from
the worst economic downturn of the 1970s, a massive amount of
information and communication technologies were introduced across the
length and breadth of economic sectors as capitalism shifted to a more
information-intensive economy – digital capitalism. **** Today digital
capitalism grips every sector, as it has expanded and extended beyond
information industries and reorganized the entire economy from
manufacturing production to finance to science to education to arts and
health and impacts every iota of people’s social
lives.^[\[14\]](#cite_note-ftn14-14)^ **** Current growth of large-scale
data centers by Internet companies and their reoccupation of industrial
towns needs to be situated within the context of the development of
digital capitalism.

## <span id="From_Manufacturing_Factory_to_Data_Factory" class="mw-headline">From Manufacturing Factory to Data Factory</span>

Large-scale data centers – sometimes called “server farms” in an oddly
quaint allusion to the pre-industrial agrarian society – are centralized
facilities that primarily contain large numbers of servers and computer
equipment used for data processing, data storage, and high-speed
telecommunications. In a sense, data centers are similar to the
capitalist factory system; but instead of a linear process of input of
raw materials to output of material goods for mass consumption, they
input mass data in order to facilitate and expand the endless cycle of
commodification – an Ouroboros-like machine. As the factory system
enables the production of more goods at a lower cost through automation
and control of labor to maximize profit, data centers have been
developed to process large quantities of bits and bytes as fast as
possible and at as low a cost as possible through automation and
centralization. The data center is a hyper-automated digital factory
system that enables the operation of hundreds of thousands of servers
through centralization in order to conduct business around the clock and
around the globe. Compared to traditional industrial factories that
produce material goods and generally employ entire towns if not cities,
large-scale data centers each generally employ fewer than 100 full-time
employees – most of these employees are either engineers or security
guards. In a way, data centers are the ultimate automated factory.
Moreover, the owner of a traditional factory needs to
acquire/purchase/extract raw materials to produce commodities; however,
much of the raw data for a data center are freely drawn from the labor
and everyday activities of Internet users without a direct cost to the
data center. The factory system is to industrial capitalism what data
centers are becoming to digital capitalism.

## <span id="The_Growth_of_Google.E2.80.99s_Data_Factories" class="mw-headline">The Growth of Google’s Data Factories</span>

Today, there is a growing arms race among leading Internet companies –
Google, Microsoft, Amazon, Facebook, IBM – in building out large-scale
data centers around the globe.^[\[15\]](#cite_note-ftn16-15)^ Among
these companies, Google has so far been leading in terms of scale and
capital investment. In 2014, the company spent \$11 billion for real
estate purchases, production equipment, and data center
construction,^[\[16\]](#cite_note-ftn17-16)^ compared to Amazon which
spent \$4.9 billion and Facebook with \$1.8 billion in the same
year.^[\[17\]](#cite_note-ftn18-17)^

Until 2002, Google rented only one collocation facility in Santa Clara,
California to house about 300 servers.^[\[18\]](#cite_note-ftn19-18)^
However, by 2003 the company had started to purchase entire collocation
buildings that were cheaply available due to overexpansion during the
dot.com era. Google soon began to design and build its own data centers
containing thousands of custom-built servers as Google expanded its
services and global market and responded to competitive pressures.
Initially, Google was highly secretive about its data center locations
and related technologies; a former Google employee called this Google’s
“Manhattan project.” However, in 2012, Google began to open up its data
centers. While this seems like Google’s had a change of heart and wants
to be more transparent about their data centers to the public, it is in
reality more about Google’s self-serving public relations onslaught to
show how its cloud infrastructure is superior to Google’s competitors
and to secure future cloud clients.^[\[19\]](#cite_note-ftn20-19)^

As of 2016, Google has data centers in 14 locations around the globe –
eight in Americas, two in Asia and four in Europe – with an unknown
number of collocated centers – ones in which space, servers, and
infrastructure are shared with other companies – in undisclosed
locations. The sheer size of Google’s data centers is reflected in its
server chip consumption. In all, Google supposedly accounts for 5% of
all server chips sold in the world,^[\[20\]](#cite_note-ftn21-20)^ and
it is even affecting the price of chips as the company is one of biggest
chip buyers. Google’s recent allying with Qualcomm for its new chip has
become a threat to Intel – Google has been the largest customer of the
world’s largest chip maker for quite some
time.^[\[21\]](#cite_note-ftn22-21)^ According to Steven Levy, Google
admitted that, “it is the largest computing manufacturer in the world –
making its own servers requires it to build more units every year than
the industry giants HP, Dell, and
Lenovo.”^[\[22\]](#cite_note-ftn23-22)^ Moreover, Google has been
amassing cheap “dark fibre” – fibre optic cables that were laid down
during the 1990s dot.com boom by now-defunct telecom firms betting on
increased internet traffic^[\[23\]](#cite_note-23)^ - constructing
Google’s fibre optic cables in US cities,^[\[24\]](#cite_note-24)^ and
investing in building massive undersea cables to maintain its dominance
and expand its markets by controlling Internet
infrastructure.^[\[25\]](#cite_note-25)^

With its own customized servers and software, Google is building a
massive data center network infrastructure, delivering its service at
unprecedented speeds around the clock and around the world. According to
one report, Google’s global network of data centers, with a capacity to
deliver 1-petabit-per-second bandwidth, is powerful enough to read all
of the scanned books in the Library of Congress in a fraction of a
second.^[\[26\]](#cite_note-ftn24-26)^ *New York Times* columnist Pascal
Zachary once reported:

> …I believe that the physical network is Google’s “secret sauce,” its
> premier competitive advantage. While a brilliant lone wolf can
> conceive of a dazzling algorithm, only a super wealthy and
> well-managed organization can run what is arguably the most valuable
> computer network on the planet. Without the computer network, Google
> is nothing.^[\[27\]](#cite_note-ftn25-27)^

Where then is Google’s secret sauce physically located? Despite its
massiveness, Google’s data center infrastructure and locations have been
invisible to millions of everyday Google users around the globe – users
assume that Google is ubiquitous, the largest cloud in the ‘net.’
However, this infrastructure is no longer unnoticed since the
infrastructure needed to support the “new economy” is beginning to
occupy and transform our landscapes and building a new fixed network of
global digital production space.

## <span id="New_Network_of_Digital_Production_Space:_Restructuring_Industrial_cities" class="mw-headline">New Network of Digital Production Space: Restructuring Industrial cities</span>

While Google’s data traffic and exchange extends well beyond geographic
boundaries, its physical plants are fixed in places where **** digital
goods and services are processed and produced. For the production of
material goods, access to cheap labor has long been one of the primary
criteria for companies to select their places of production; but for
data centers, a large quantity of cheap labor is not as important since
they require only a small number of employees. The common
characteristics necessary for data center sites have so far been: good
fiber-optic infrastructure; cheap and reliable power sources for cooling
and running servers, geographical diversity for redundancy and speed,
cheap land, and locations close to target
markets.^[\[28\]](#cite_note-ftn26-28)^ Today, if one finds geographical
areas in the world with some combination of these factors, there will
likely be data centers there or in the planning stages for the near
future.

Given these criteria, there has been an emerging trend of
reconfiguration and conversion to data centers of former industrial
sites such as paper mills, printing plants, steel plants, textile mills,
auto plants, aluminum plants and coal plants. In the United States, and
in particular rust belt regions of the upper Northeast, Great Lakes and
Midwest regions – previously hubs of manufacturing industries and heart
lands of both industrial capitalism and labor movements – are turning
(or attempting to turn) into hotspots for large-scale data centers for
Internet companies.^[\[29\]](#cite_note-ftn27-29)^ These cities are the
remains of past crises of industrial capitalism as well as of long labor
struggles.

The reasons that former industrial sites in the US and other parts of
the world are attractive for data center conversion is that, starting in
the 1970s, many factories had closed or moved their operations overseas
in search of ever-cheaper labor and concomitantly weak or nonexistent
labor laws, leaving behind solid physical plants and industrial
infrastructures of power, water and cooling systems once used to drive
industrial machines and production lines and now perfectly fit for data
center development.^[\[30\]](#cite_note-ftn28-30)^ Especially, finding
cheap energy is crucial for companies like Google since data center
energy costs are a major expenditure.

Moreover, many communities surrounding former industrial sites have
struggled and become distressed with increasing poverty, high
unemployment and little labor power. Thus, under the guise of “economic
development,” many state and local governments have been eager to lure
data centers by offering lavish subsidies for IT companies. For at least
the last five years, state after state has legislated tax breaks for
data centers and about a dozen states have created customized incentives
programs for data center operations.^[\[31\]](#cite_note-ftn29-31)^
State incentives range from full or partial exemptions of sales/use
taxes on equipment, construction materials, and in some cases purchases
of electricity and backup fuel.^[\[32\]](#cite_note-ftn30-32)^ This kind
of corporate-centric economic development is far from the construction
of democratic cities that prioritize social needs and collective
interests, and reflects the environmental and long-term sustainability
of communities; but rather the goal is to, “create a good business
climate and therefore to optimize conditions for capital accumulation no
matter what the consequences for employment or social and environmental
well-being.”^[\[33\]](#cite_note-ftn31-33)^

Google’s first large-scale data center site is located in one of these
struggling former industrial towns. In 2006, Google opened its first
data center in The Dalles – now nicknamed Googleville – a town of a
little over 15,000 located alongside the Columbia River and about 80
miles east of Portland, Oregon. It is an ideal site in the sense that it
is close to a major metropolitan corridor (Seattle-Tacoma-Portland) to
serve business interests and large urban population centers; yet, cheap
land, little organized labor, and the promise of cheap electrical power
from the Bonneville Power Administration, a federal governmental agency,
as well as a 15-year property tax exemption. In addition, The Dalles had
already built a fiber-optic loop as part of its economic development
hoping to attract the IT industry.^[\[34\]](#cite_note-ftn32-34)^

Not long ago, the residents of The Dalles and communities up and down
the Columbia River gorge relied on the aluminum industry, an industry
which required massive amounts of – in this case hydroelectric – power.
Energy makes up 40 percent of the cost of aluminum
production^[\[35\]](#cite_note-ftn33-35)^ and was boosted by the war
economies of World War II and the Korean war as aluminum was used for
various war products, especially aircraft. However, starting in 1980,
aluminum smelter plants began to close and move out of the area, laid
off their workers and left their installed infrastructure behind.

Since then, The Dalles, like other industrial towns, has suffered from
high unemployment, poverty, aging population and budget-strapped
schools, etc. Thus, the decision for Google to build a data center the
size of two football fields (68,680-square-foot storage buildings) in
order to take advantage of the preinstalled fiber optic infrastructure,
relatively cheap hydropower from the Dalles Dam, and tax benefits was
presented as the new hope for the distressed town and a large employment
opportunity for the town’s population. ^[\[36\]](#cite_note-ftn34-36)^

There was much community excitement that Google’s arrival would mean an
economic revival for the struggling city and a better life for the poor
, but no one could discuss about it at the time of negotiations with
Google because local officials involved in negotiations had all signed
nondisclosure agreements (NDAs);^[\[37\]](#cite_note-ftn35-37)^ they
were required not to mention Google in any way but were instead
instructed to refer to the project as “Project
02.”^[\[38\]](#cite_note-ftn36-38)^ Google insisted that the information
it shared with representatives of The Dalles not be subject to public
records disclosures.^[\[39\]](#cite_note-ftn37-39)^ While public
subsidies were a necessary precondition of building the data
center,^[\[40\]](#cite_note-ftn38-40)^ there were no transparency or
open public debates on alternative visions of development that reflects
collective community interests.

Google’s highly anticipated data center in The Dalles opened in 2006,
but it “opened” only in the sense that it became operational. To this
day, Google’s data center site is off-limits to the community and is
well-guarded, including multiple CCTV cameras which survey the grounds
around the clock. Google might boast of its corporate culture as “open”
and “non-hierarchical” but this does not extend to the data centers
within the community where Google benefits as it extracts resources. Not
only was the building process secretive, but access to the data center
itself is highly restricted. Data centers are well secured with several
guards, gates and checkpoints. Google’s data center has reshaped the
landscape into a pseudo-militarized zone as it is not far off from a
top-secret military compound – access denied.

This kind of landscape is reproduced in other parts of the US as well.
New data center hubs have begun to emerge in other rural communities;
one of them is in southwestern North Carolina where the leading tech
giants – Google, Facebook, Apple, Disney and American Express – have
built data centers in close proximity to each other. The cluster of data
centers is referred to as the “NC Data Center
Corridor,”^[\[41\]](#cite_note-ftn39-41)^ a neologism used to market the
area.

At one time, the southwestern part of North Carolina had heavy
concentration of highly labor-intensive textiles and furniture
industries that exploited the region’s cheap labor supply and where
workers fought long and hard for better working conditions and wages.
However, over the last 25 years, factories have closed and slowly moved
out of the area and been relocated to Asia and Latin
America.^[\[42\]](#cite_note-ftn40-42)^ As a result – and mirroring the
situation in The Dalles – the area has suffered a series of layoffs,
chronically high unemployment rates and poverty, but now is being
rebranded as a center of the “new economy” geared toward attracting
high-tech industries. For many towns, abandoned manufacturing plants are
no longer an eyesore but rather are becoming major selling points to the
IT industry. Rich Miller, editor of *Data Center Knowledge*, stated,
“one of the things that’s driving the competitiveness of our area is the
power capacity built for manufacturers in the past 50
years.”^[\[43\]](#cite_note-ftn41-43)^ ****

In 2008, Google opened a \$600 million data center in Lenoir, NC, a town
in Caldwell County (population 18,228^[\[44\]](#cite_note-ftn42-44)^).
Lenoir was once known as the furniture capital of the South but lost
1,120 jobs in 2006.^[\[45\]](#cite_note-ftn43-45)^ More than 300,000
furniture jobs moved away from the United States during 2000 as
factories relocate to China for cheaper labor and operational
costs.^[\[46\]](#cite_note-ftn44-46)^ In order to lure Google, Caldwell
County and the City of Lenoir gave Google a 100 percent waiver on
business property taxes, an 80 percent waiver on real estate property
taxes over the next 30 years,^[\[47\]](#cite_note-ftn45-47)^ and various
other incentives. Former NC Governor Mike Easley announced that, “this
company will provide hundreds of good-paying, knowledge-based jobs that
North Carolina’s citizens want;”^[\[48\]](#cite_note-ftn46-48)^ yet, he
addressed neither the cost of attracting Google for taxpayers –
including those laid-off factory workers – nor the environmental impact
of the data center. In 2013, Google expanded its operation in Lenoir
with an additional \$600 million investment, and as of 2015, it has 250
employees in its 220-plus acre data center
site.^[\[49\]](#cite_note-ftn47-49)^

The company continues its crusade of giving “hope” to distressed
communities and now “saving” the environment from the old coal-fueled
industrial economy. Google’s latest project in the US is in Widows
Creek, **** Alabama where the company is converting a coal burning power
plant commissioned in 1952 – which has been polluting the area for years
– to its 14^th^ data center powered by renewable power. Shifting from
coal to renewable energy seems to demonstrate how Google has gone
“green” and is being a different kind of corporation that cares for the
environment. However, this is a highly calculated business decision
given that relying on renewable energy is more economical over the long
term than coal – which is more volatile as commodity prices greatly
fluctuate.^[\[50\]](#cite_note-ftn48-50)^ Google is gobbling up
renewable energy deals around the world to procure cheap energy and
power its data centers.^[\[51\]](#cite_note-ftn49-51)^ However, Google’s
“green” public relations also camouflage environmental damages that are
brought by the data center’s enormous power consumption, e-waste from
hardware, rare earth mining and the environmental damage over the entire
supply chain.^[\[52\]](#cite_note-52)^

The trend of reoccupation of industrial sites by data centers is not
confined to the US. Google’s Internet business operates across
territories and more than 50% of its revenues come from outside the US.
As Google’s domestic search market share has stabilized at around 60%
share, the company has aggressively moved to build data centers around
the world for its global expansion. One of Google’s most ambitious data
center projects outside the US was in Hamina, Finland where Google
converted a paper mill to a data center.

In 2008, Stora Enso, the Finnish paper maker, in which the Finnish
Government held 16% of the company’s shares and controlled 34% of the
company, shut down its Summa paper mill on the site close to the city of
Hamina in Southeastern Finland despite workers’ resistance against the
closure.^[\[53\]](#cite_note-ftn51-53)^ The company shed 985 jobs
including 485 from the Summa plant.^[\[54\]](#cite_note-ftn52-54)^
Shortly after closing the plant, Stora Enso sold the 53 year-old paper
mill site to Google for roughly \$52 million which included 410 acres of
land and the paper mill and its infrastructure itself.

Whitewashing the workers’ struggles, the *Helsinki Times* reported that,
“everyone was excited about Google coming to Finland. The news that the
Internet giant had bought the old Stora Enso mill in Hamina for a data
centre was great news for a community stunned by job losses and a
slowing economy.”^[\[55\]](#cite_note-ftn53-55)^ However, the local
elites recognized that jobs created by Google would not drastically
affect the city’s unemployment rate or alleviate the economic plight for
many people in the community, so they justified their decision by
arguing that connecting Google’s logo to the city’s image would result
in increased investments in the area.^[\[56\]](#cite_note-ftn54-56)^ The
facility had roughly 125 full-time employees when Google announced its
Hamina operation’s expansion in 2013.^[\[57\]](#cite_note-ftn55-57)^ The
data center is monitored by Google’s customary CCTV cameras and motion
detectors; even Google staff only have access to the server halls after
passing biometric authentication using iris recognition
scanners.^[\[58\]](#cite_note-ftn56-58)^

Like Google’s other data centers, Google’s decision to build a data
center in Hamina is not merely because of favorable existing
infrastructure or natural resources. The location of Hamina as its first
Nordic data center is vital and strategic in terms of extending Google’s
reach into geographically dispersed markets, speed and management of
data traffic. Hamina is located close to the border with Russia and the
area has long been known for good Internet connectivity via Scandinavian
telecommunications giant TeliaSonera, whose services and international
connections run right through the area of Hamina and reach into Russia
as well as to Sweden and Western Europe.^[\[59\]](#cite_note-ftn57-59)^
Eastern Europe has a growing Internet market and Russia is one of the
few countries where Google does not dominate the search market. Yandex,
Russia’s native language search engine, controls the Russian search
market with over 60% share.^[\[60\]](#cite_note-ftn58-60)^ By locating
its infrastructure in Hamina, Google is establishing its strategic
global digital production beach-head for both the Nordic and Russian
markets.

As Google is trying to maintain its global dominance and expand its
business, the company has continued to build out its data center
operations on European soil. Besides Finland, Google has built data
centers in Dublin, Ireland, and St. Ghislain and Mons in Belgium, which
respectively had expanded their operations after their initial
construction. However, the stories of each of these data centers is
similar: aluminum smelting plant town The Dalles, Oregon and Lenoir
North Carolina in the US, paper mill town Hamina, Finland, coal-mining
town Ghislain–Mons, Belgium and a warehouse converted data center in
Dublin, Ireland. Each of these were once industrial production sites
and/or sites for the extraction of environmental resources turned into
data centers creating temporal production spaces to accelerate digital
capitalism. Google’s latest venture in Europe is in a seaport town of
Eemshaven, Netherlands which hosts several power stations as well as the
transatlantic fiber-optic cable which links the US and Europe.

To many struggling communities around the world, the building of
Google’s large-scale data centers has been presented by the company and
by political elites as an opportunity to participate in the “new
economy” – as well as a veiled threat of being left behind from the “new
economy” – as if this would magically lead to the creation of prosperity
and equality. In reality, these cities and towns are being reorganized
and reoccupied for corporate interests, re-integrated into sites of
capital accumulation and re-emerged as new networks of production for
capitalist development.

## <span id="Conclusion" class="mw-headline">Conclusion</span>

Is the current physical landscape that supports the “new economy”
outside of capitalist social relations? Does the process of the
redevelopment of struggling former industrial cites by building Google
data centers under the slogan of participation in the “new economy”
really meet social needs, and express democratic values? The “new
economy” is boasted about as if it is radically different from past
industrial capitalist development, the solution to myriad social
problems that hold the potential for growth outside of the capitalist
realm; however, the “new economy” operates deeply within the logic of
capitalist development – constant technological innovation, relocation
and reconstruction of new physical production places to link
geographically dispersed markets, reduction of labor costs, removal of
obstacles that hinder its growth and continuous expansion. Google’s
purely market-driven data centers illustrate that the “new economy”
built on data and information does not bypass physical infrastructures
and physical places for the production and distribution of digital
commodities. Rather, it is firmly anchored in the physical world and
simply establishes new infrastructures on top of existing industrial
ones and a new network of production places to meet the needs of the
processes of digital commodities at the expense of environmental, labor
and social well-being.

We celebrate the democratic possibilities of the “networked information
economy” providing for alternative space free from capitalist practices;
however, it is vital to recognize that this “new economy” in which we
put our hopes is supported by, built on, and firmly planted in our
material world. The question that we need to ask ourselves is: given
that our communities and physical infrastructures continue to be
configured to assist the reproduction of the social relations of
capitalism, how far can our “new economy” deliver on the democracy and
social justice for which we all strive?

1.  <div id="cite_note-ftn1-1">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn1_1-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> James Titcomb, “World’s internet traffic to
    surpass one zettabyte in 2016,” *Telegraph*, February 4, 2016,
    <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2016/02/04/worlds-internet-traffic-to-surpass-one-zettabyte-in-2016/></span>
2.  <div id="cite_note-ftn2-2">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn2_2-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> Ibid.</span>
3.  <div id="cite_note-ftn3-3">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn3_3-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> Cade Metz, “A new company called Alphabet
    now owns Google,” *Wired*, August 10, 2015.
    <http://wired.com/2015/08/new-company-called-alphabet-owns-google/>.
    </span>
4.  <div id="cite_note-ftn4-4">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn4_4-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> Google hasn’t released new data since 2012,
    but the data extrapolate from based on Google annual growth date.
    **** See Danny Sullivan, “Google Still Doing At Least 1 Trillion
    Searches Per Year,” *Search Engine Land*, January 16, 2015,
    <http://searchengineland.com/google-1-trillion-searches-per-year-212940></span>
5.  <div id="cite_note-ftn5-5">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn5_5-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> This is Google’s desktop search engine
    market as of January 2016. See “Worldwide desktop market share of
    leading search engines from January 2010 to January 2016,” Statista,
    <http://www.statista.com/statistics/216573/worldwide-market-share-of-search-engines/>.</span>
6.  <div id="cite_note-ftn6-6">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn6_6-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> “Annual revenue of Alphabet from 2011 to
    2015 (in billions of US dollars),” Statista,
    <http://www.statista.com/statistics/507742/alphabet-annual-global-revenue/>.</span>
7.  <div id="cite_note-ftn7-7">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn7_7-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> “Advertising revenue of Google from 2001 to
    2015 (in billion U.S. dollars),” Statista*,*
    <http://www.statista.com/statistics/266249/advertising-revenue-of-google/>.</span>
8.  <div id="cite_note-ftn8-8">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn8_8-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> Seven Levy, “Secret of Googlenomics:
    Data-Fueled Recipe Brews Profitability,” *Wired,* May 22, 2009,
    <http://www.wired.com/culture/culturereviews/magazine/17-06/nep_googlenomics?currentPage=all>.</span>
9.  <div id="cite_note-ftn9-9">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn9_9-0)</span> <span
    class="reference-text"> Daniel Bell, *The Coming of Post-Industrial
    Society: A Venture In Social Forecasting* (New York: Basic Books,
    1974); Alvin Toffler, *The Third Wave* (New York:
    Morrow, 1980).</span>
10. <div id="cite_note-ftn10-10">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn10_10-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> The term “territory of profit” is
    borrowed from Gary Fields’ book titled *Territories of Profit:*
    *Communications, Capitalist Development, and the Innovative
    Enterprises of G. F. Swift and Dell Computer* (Stanford University
    Press, 2003)</span>
11. <div id="cite_note-ftn11-11">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn11_11-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> David Harvey, *Spaces of capital:
    towards a critical geography* (New York: Routledge, 2001) </span>
12. <div id="cite_note-ftn12-12">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn12_12-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Top of FormDan Schiller, *Digital
    capitalism networking the global market system* (Cambridge, Mass:
    MIT Press, 1999).</span>
13. <div id="cite_note-ftn13-13">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn13_13-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Dan Schiller, “Power Under Pressure:
    Digital Capitalism In Crisis,” *International Journal of
    Communication* 5 (2011): 924–941</span>
14. <div id="cite_note-ftn14-14">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn14_14-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Dan Schiller, “Digital capitalism:
    stagnation and contention?” *Open Democracy*, October 13, 2015,
    <https://www.opendemocracy.net/digitaliberties/dan-schiller/digital-capitalism-stagnation-and-contention>.</span>
15. <div id="cite_note-ftn16-15">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn16_15-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Jason Hiner, “Why Microsoft, Google,
    and Amazon are racing to run your data center.” *ZDNet,* June 4,
    2009,
    <http://www.zdnet.com/blog/btl/why-microsoft-google-and-amazon-are-racing-to-run-your-data-center/19733>.</span>
16. <div id="cite_note-ftn17-16">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn17_16-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Derrick Harris, “Google had its
    biggest quarter ever for data center spending. Again,” *Gigaom*,
    February 4, 2015, ****
    <https://gigaom.com/2015/02/04/google-had-its-biggest-quarter-ever-for-data-center-spending-again/>.</span>
17. <div id="cite_note-ftn18-17">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn18_17-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Ibid. </span>
18. <div id="cite_note-ftn19-18">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn19_18-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Steven Levy, *In the plex: how Google
    thinks, works, and shapes our lives* )New York: Simon & Schuster,
    2011), 182.</span>
19. <div id="cite_note-ftn20-19">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn20_19-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Steven Levy, “Google Throws Open Doors
    to Its Top-Secret Data Center,” *Wired,* October 17 2012,
    <http://www.wired.com/2012/10/ff-inside-google-data-center/>.</span>
20. <div id="cite_note-ftn21-20">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn21_20-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Cade Metz, “Google’s Hardware Endgame?
    Making Its Very Own Chips,” *Wired,* February 12, 2016, ****
    <http://www.wired.com/2016/02/googles-hardware-endgame-making-its-very-own-chips/>.</span>
21. <div id="cite_note-ftn22-21">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn22_21-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Ian King and Jack Clark, “Qualcomm's
    Fledgling Server-Chip Efforts,” *Bloomberg Business*, February 3,
    2016, ****
    <http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-03/google-said-to-endorse-qualcomm-s-fledgling-server-chip-efforts-ik6ud7qg>.</span>
22. <div id="cite_note-ftn23-22">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn23_22-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Levy, *In the Plex*, 181.</span>
23. <div id="cite_note-23">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-23)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">In 2013, Wall Street Journal reported that
    Google controls more than 100,000 miles of routes around the world
    which was considered bigger than US-based telecom company Sprint.
    See Drew FitzGerald and Spencer E. Ante, “Tech Firms Push to Control
    Web's Pipes,” Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2016,
    <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304173704579262361885883936></span>
24. <div id="cite_note-24">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-24)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">Google is offering its gigabit-speed fiber
    optic Internet service in 10 US cities. Since Internet service is a
    precondition of Google’s myriad Internet businesses, Google’s
    strategy is to control the pipes rather than relying on
    telecom firms. See Mike Wehner, “Google Fiber is succeeding and
    cable companies are starting to feel the pressure,” Business
    Insider, April 15, 2015,
    <http://www.businessinsider.com/google-fiber-is-succeeding-and-cable-companies-are-starting-to-feel-the-pressure-2015-4>;
    Ethan Baron, “Google Fiber coming to San Francisco first,” San Jose
    Mercury News, February 26, 2016,
    <http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci_29556617/sorry-san-jose-google-fiber-coming-san-francisco>.</span>
25. <div id="cite_note-25">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-25)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">Tim Hornyak, “9 things you didn't know about
    Google's undersea cable,” Computerworld, July 14, 2015,
    <http://www.computerworld.com/article/2947841/network-hardware-solutions/9-things-you-didnt-know-about-googles-undersea-cable.html></span>
26. <div id="cite_note-ftn24-26">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn24_26-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Jaikumar Vijayan, “Google Gives
    Glimpse Inside Its Massive Data Center Network,” *eWeek*, June 18,
    2015,
    <http://www.eweek.com/servers/google-gives-glimpse-inside-its-massive-data-center-network.html></span>
27. <div id="cite_note-ftn25-27">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn25_27-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Pascal Zachary, “Unsung Heroes Who
    Move Products Forward,” *New York Times,* September 30, 2007,
    <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/30/technology/30ping.html></span>
28. <div id="cite_note-ftn26-28">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn26_28-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Tomas Freeman, Jones Lang, and Jason
    Warner, “What’s Important in the Data Center Location Decision,”
    Spring 2011,
    <http://www.areadevelopment.com/siteSelection/may2011/data-center-location-decision-factors2011-62626727.shtml></span>
29. <div id="cite_note-ftn27-29">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn27_29-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> “From rust belt to data center green?”
    *Green Data Center News*, February 10, 2011,
    <http://www.greendatacenternews.org/articles/204867/from-rust-belt-to-data-center-green-by-doug-mohney/></span>
30. <div id="cite_note-ftn28-30">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn28_30-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Rich Miller, “North Carolina Emerges
    as Data Center Hub,” *Data Center Knowledge*, November 7, 2010,
    <http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2010/11/17/north-carolina-emerges-as-data-center-hub/>.</span>
31. <div id="cite_note-ftn29-31">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn29_31-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> David Chernicoff, “US tax breaks,
    state by state,” *Datacenter Dynamics*, January 6, 2016,
    <http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/design-build/us-tax-breaks-state-by-state/95428.fullarticle>;
    Case Study: Server Farms,” Good Job First,
    <http://www.goodjobsfirst.org/corporate-subsidy-watch/server-farms.%C2%A0></span>
32. <div id="cite_note-ftn30-32">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn30_32-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> John Leino, “The role of incentives in
    Data Center Location Decisions,” Critical Environment Practice,
    February 28, 2011, <http://www.cbrephoenix.com/wp_eig/?p=68>.</span>
33. <div id="cite_note-ftn31-33">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn31_33-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> David, Harvey, *Spaces of global
    capitalism* (London: Verso. 2006), 25.</span>
34. <div id="cite_note-ftn32-34">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn32_34-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Marsha Spellman, “Broadband, and
    Google, Come to Rural Oregon,” *Broadband Properties*, December
    2005,
    <http://www.broadbandproperties.com/2005issues/dec05issues/spellman.pdf>.</span>
35. <div id="cite_note-ftn33-35">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn33_35-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Ross Courtney “The Goldendale aluminum
    plant -- The death of a way of life,” *Yakima Herald-Republic*,”
    April 9, 2011,
    <http://www.yakima-herald.com/stories/2011/4/9/the-goldendale-aluminum-plant-the-death-of-a-way-of-life>.</span>
36. <div id="cite_note-ftn34-36">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn34_36-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text">
    ^Ginger\\ Strand,\\ “Google’s\\ addition\\ to\\ cheap\\ electricity,”\\ *Harper\\ Magazine*,\\ March\\ 2008,\\ <https://web.archive.org/web/20080410194348/http://harpers.org/media/slideshow/annot/2008-03/index.html>.^</span>
37. <div id="cite_note-ftn35-37">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn35_37-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Linda Rosencrance, “Top-secret Google
    data center almost completed,” *Computerworld*, June 16, 2006,
    <http://www.computerworld.com/article/2546445/data-center/top-secret-google-data-center-almost-completed.html>.</span>
38. <div id="cite_note-ftn36-38">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn36_38-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Bryon Beck, “Welcome to Googleville
    America’s newest information superhighway begins On Oregon’s Silicon
    Prairie,” *Willamette Week*, June 4, 2008,
    <http://wweek.com/portland/article-9089-welcome_to_googleville.html>.</span>
39. <div id="cite_note-ftn37-39">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn37_39-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Rich Miller, “Google & Facebook: A
    Tale of Two Data Centers,” *Data Center Knowledge*, August 2, 2010,
    <http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2010/08/10/google-facebook-a-tale-of-two-data-centers/></span>
40. <div id="cite_note-ftn38-40">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn38_40-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Ibid. </span>
41. <div id="cite_note-ftn39-41">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn39_41-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Alex Barkinka, “From textiles to tech,
    the state’s newest crop,” *Reese News Lab,* April 13, 2011,
    <http://reesenews.org/2011/04/13/from-textiles-to-tech-the-states-newest-crop/14263/>.</span>
42. <div id="cite_note-ftn40-42">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn40_42-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> “Textile & Apparel Overview,” North
    Carolina in the Global Economy,
    <http://www.ncglobaleconomy.com/textiles/overview.shtml>. </span>
43. <div id="cite_note-ftn41-43">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn41_43-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Rich Miller, “The Apple-Google Data
    Center Corridor,” *Data Center knowledge*, August 4, 2009,
    <http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2009/08/04/the-apple-google-data-center-corridor/>.</span>
44. <div id="cite_note-ftn42-44">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn42_44-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> “2010 Decennial Census from the US
    Census Bureau,”
    <http://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/cf/1.0/en/place/Lenoir> city,
    North Carolina/POPULATION/DECENNIAL\_CNT.</span>
45. <div id="cite_note-ftn43-45">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn43_45-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> North Carolina in the Global Economy.
    Retrieved from
    <http://www.soc.duke.edu/NC_GlobalEconomy/furniture/workers.shtml></span>
46. <div id="cite_note-ftn44-46">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn44_46-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Frank Langfitt, Furniture Work Shifts
    From N.C. To South China. *National Public Radio*, December 1, 2009,
    <http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=121576791&ft=1&f=121637143>;
    Dan Morse, In North Carolina, Furniture Makers Try to Stay Alive,”
    *Wall Street Journal*, February 20, 2004,
    <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB107724173388134838>; Robert Lacy,
    “Whither North Carolina Furniture Manufacturing,” Federal Reserve
    Bank of Richmond, Working Paper Series, September 2004,
    <https://www.richmondfed.org/~/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/working_papers/2004/pdf/wp04-7.pdf></span>
47. <div id="cite_note-ftn45-47">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn45_47-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Stephen Shankland, “Google gives
    itself leeway for N.C., data center,” *Cnet*, December 5, 2008,
    <http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-10114349-93.html>; Bill Bradley,
    “Cities Keep Giving Out Money for Server Farms, See Very Few Jobs in
    Return,” *Next City*, August 15, 2013,
    <https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/cities-keep-giving-out-money-for-server-farms-see-few-jobs-in-return>.</span>
48. <div id="cite_note-ftn46-48">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn46_48-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Katherine Noyes, “Google Taps North
    Carolina for New Datacenter,” *E-Commerce Times*, January 19, 2007,
    <http://www.ecommercetimes.com/story/55266.html?wlc=1255976822></span>
49. <div id="cite_note-ftn47-49">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn47_49-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Getahn Ward, “Google to invest in new
    Clarksville data center,” *Tennessean*, December 22, 2015,
    <http://www.tennessean.com/story/money/real-estate/2015/12/21/google-invest-500m-new-clarksville-data-center/77474046/>.</span>
50. <div id="cite_note-ftn48-50">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn48_50-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Ingrid Burrington, “The Environmental
    Toll of a Netflix Binge,” *Atlantic*, December 16, 2015,
    <http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/12/there-are-no-clean-clouds/420744/>.</span>
51. <div id="cite_note-ftn49-51">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn49_51-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Mark Bergen, “After Gates, Google
    Splurges on Green With Largest Renewable Energy Buy for Server
    Farms,” Re/code, December 3, 2015,
    <http://recode.net/2015/12/03/after-gates-google-splurges-on-green-with-largest-renewable-energy-buy-for-server-farms/>.</span>
52. <div id="cite_note-52">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-52)</span> <span
    class="reference-text">Burrington, “The Environmental Toll of a
    Netflix Binge.”; Richard Maxwell and Toby Miller, Greening the media
    (New York: Oxford Univeristy Press, 2012)</span>
53. <div id="cite_note-ftn51-53">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn51_53-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> “Finnish Paper Industry Uses Court
    Order to Block Government Protest,” **** IndustriAll Global Union,
    ****
    <http://www.industriall-union.org/archive/icem/finnish-paper-industry-uses-court-order-to-block-government-protest>.</span>
54. <div id="cite_note-ftn52-54">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn52_54-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Terhi Kinnunen and Tarmo Virki, “Stora
    to cut 985 jobs, close mills despite protests,” *Reuter*, January
    17, 2008,
    <http://www.reuters.com/article/storaenso-idUSL1732158220080117>;
    “Workers react to threat of closure of paper pulp mills,” European
    Foundation, March 3, 2008,
    <http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/observatories/eurwork/articles/workers-react-to-threat-of-closure-of-paper-pulp-mills>.</span>
55. <div id="cite_note-ftn53-55">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn53_55-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> David Cord, “Welcome to Finland,” *The
    Helsinki Times*, April 9, 2009,
    <http://www.helsinkitimes.fi/helsinkitimes/2009apr/issue15-95/helsinki_times15-95.pdf>.</span>
56. <div id="cite_note-ftn54-56">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn54_56-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Elina Kervinen, Google is busy turning
    the old Summa paper mill into a data centre. *Helsingin Sanomat
    International Edition*, October 9, 2010,
    <https://web.archive.org/web/20120610020753/http://www.hs.fi/english/article/Google+is+busy+turning+the+old+Summa+paper+mill+into+a+data+centre/1135260141400>.</span>
57. <div id="cite_note-ftn55-57">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn55_57-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> “Google invests 450M in expansion of
    Hamina data centre,” *Helsinki Times*, November 4, 2013,
    <http://www.helsinkitimes.fi/business/8255-google-invests-450m-in-expansion-of-hamina-data-centre.html>.</span>
58. <div id="cite_note-ftn56-58">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn56_58-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> “Revealed: Google’s new mega data
    center in Finland,” *Pingdon,* September 15, 2010,
    <http://royal.pingdom.com/2010/09/15/googles-mega-data-center-in-finland/></span>
59. <div id="cite_note-ftn57-59">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn57_59-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Ibid.</span>
60. <div id="cite_note-ftn58-60">

    </div>

    <span class="mw-cite-backlink">[↑](#cite_ref-ftn58_60-0)</span>
    <span class="reference-text"> Shiv Mehta, “What's Google Strategy
    for the Russian Market?” *Investopedia,* July 28, 2015, ****
    <http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/072815/whats-google-strategy-russian-market.asp>.</span>

