# Mevrouw C

[Femke
Snelting](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Femke_Snelting "Femke Snelting")

## [Madame C.01](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Wilhelmina_Coops "Wilhelmina Coops")

[![02.Screenshot from 2015-10-03
07-42-03.png](/wiki/images/thumb/c/c1/02.Screenshot_from_2015-10-03_07-42-03.png/600px-02.Screenshot_from_2015-10-03_07-42-03.png)](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/File:02.Screenshot_from_2015-10-03_07-42-03.png)

In the autumn of 1932, I was still very young. I arrived in Brussels as
au-pair but instead of helping in the house, I ended up assisting the
professor finishing his book. At the time I arrived, the work itself was
completed but his handwriting was hardly decipherable and the printer
had a difficult time working with the manuscript. It was my job to
correct the typeset proofs. Often there were words that neither the
printer, nor I could decipher, so we had to ask. But often the professor
did not have time. So I did my best to make the text as legible as
possible.

On the last proof that the printer delivered, the professor wrote to me:

“After five months of work behind the same table, here it is. Now it is
your turn to love the book, the pre-book and the spoken word, and to
develop a good sense of documentation, of institution, and of
[Mundaneum](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Mundaneum "Mundaneum").”

## [Madame C.02](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Madame_Canonne "Madame Canonne")

[400px](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php?title=Special:Upload&wpDestFile=04.ActeDonation_AmisPalaisMondial2CLPCF_22Mars1985_04.png "File:04.ActeDonation AmisPalaisMondial2CLPCF 22Mars1985 04.png")

She serves us coffee from a ceramic coffee pot and also cake bought at
the bakery next door. 'It's all written in the files' she reminds us
repeatedly, and tells us about one day in the sixties, when her husband
returned home, telling her excitedly that he discovered the Mundaneum
Archives at Chaussee de Louvain in Brussels. Ever since, he would return
to the same building, making friends with the friends of the Palais
Mondial, those dedicated caretakers of the immense paper heritage.

*I haven't been there so often myself*,

she says.

“But I do remember there were cats, to keep the mice away from the
paper. And my husband loved cats. So in the eighties, when he was
finally in a position to save the archives, the cats had to be taken
care of too. And the cats were written into the inventory.”

We finish our coffee and she takes us behind a curtain that separates
the salon from a small office. She shows us four green binders that
contain the meticulously filed papers of her late husband pertaining to
the
[Mundaneum](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Mundaneum "Mundaneum").
In the third is the Donation act, dated 4 april 1985 that describes the
transfer of the archives from the Friends of the Palais Mondial to the
Center for public reading of the French community.

The cats are nowhere to be found.

## [Madame C.O3](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Cato_van_Nederhasselt "Cato van Nederhasselt")

[![Archives
MundaneumDSC04639.jpg](/wiki/images/thumb/9/92/Archives_MundaneumDSC04639.jpg/600px-Archives_MundaneumDSC04639.jpg)](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/File:Archives_MundaneumDSC04639.jpg)

In a margarine box, between thousands of notes, tickets, postcards,
letters, all folded to the size of an index card we find this:

*Paul, leave me the key to the house, I forgot mine. Put it on your
desk, in the small index card box. C.*
