# The Indexalist 

[De Indexalist
(Nederlands)](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/De_Indexalist "De Indexalist")


[Matthew
Fuller](http://www.mondotheque.be/wiki/index.php/Matthew_Fuller "Matthew Fuller")

I first spoke to the patient in the last week of that August. That
evening the sun was tender in drawing its shadows across the lines of
his face. The eyes gazed softly into a close middle distance, as if
composing a line upon a translucent page hung in the middle of the air,
the hands tapping out a stanza or two of music on legs covered by the
brown folds of a towelling dressing gown. He had the air of someone who
had seen something of great amazement but yet lacked the means to put it
into language. As I got to know the patient over the next few weeks I
learned that this was not for the want of effort.

In his youth he had dabbled with the world-speak language Volapük, one
designed to do away with the incompatibility of tongues, to establish a
standard in which scientific intercourse might be conducted with maximum
efficiency and with minimal friction in movement between minds,
laboratories and publications. Latin biological names, the magnificent
table of elements, metric units of measurement, the nomenclature of
celestial objects from clouds to planets, anatomical parts and medical
conditions all had their own systems of naming beyond any specific
tongue. This was an attempt to bring reason into speech and record, but
there were other means to do so when reality resisted these early
measures.

The dabbling, he reflected, had become a little more than that. He had
subscribed to journals in the language, he wrote letters to colleagues
and received them in return. A few words of world-speak remained readily
on his tongue, words that he spat out regularly into the
yellow-wallpapered lounge of the sanatorium with a disgust that was
lugubriously palpable.

According to my records, and in piecing together the notes of previous
doctors, there was something else however, something more profound that
the language only hinted at. Just as the postal system did not require
the adoption of any language in particular but had its formats that
integrated them into addressee, address line, postal town and country,
something that organised the span of the earth, so there was a sense of
the patient as having sustained an encounter with a fundamental form of
organisation that mapped out his soul. More thrilling than the question
of language indeed was that of the system of organisation upon which
linguistic symbols are inscribed. I present for the reader’s
contemplation some statements typical of those he seemed to mull over.

“The index card system spoke to my soul. Suffice it to say that in its
use I enjoyed the highest form of spiritual pleasure, and organisational
efficiency, a profound flowering of intellect in which every thought
moved between its enunciation, evidence, reference and articulation in a
mellifluous flow of ideation and the gratification of curiosity.” This
sense of the soul as a roving enquiry moving across eras, across forms
of knowledge and through the serried landscapes of the vast planet and
cosmos was returned to over and over, a sense that an inexplicable force
was within him yet always escaping his touch.

“At every reference stood another reference, each more interesting than
the last. Each the apex of a pyramid of further reading, pregnant with
the threat of digression, each a thin high wire which, if not observed
might lead the author into the fall of error, a finding already found
against and written up.” He mentions too, a number of times, the way the
furniture seemed to assist his thoughts - the ease of reference implied
by the way in which the desk aligned with the text resting upon the
pages of the off-print, journal, newspaper, blueprint or book above
which further drawers of cards stood ready in their cabinet. All were
integrated into the system. And yet, amidst these frenetic recollections
there was a note of mourning in his contemplative moods, “The
superposition of all planes of enquiry and of thought in one system
repels those for whom such harmonious speed is suspicious.” This thought
was delivered with a stare that was not exactly one of accusation, but
that lingered with the impression that there was a further statement to
follow it, and another, queued up ready to follow.

As I gained the trust of the patient, there was a sense in which he
estimated me as something of a junior collaborator, a clerk to his
natural role as manager. A lucky, if slightly doubtful, young man whom
he might mentor into efficiency and a state of full access to
information. For his world, there was not the corruption and tiredness
of the old methods. Ideas moved faster in his mind than they might now
across the world. To possess a register of thoughts covering a period of
some years is to have an asset, the value of which is almost
incalculable. That it can answer any question respecting any thought
about which one has had an enquiry is but the smallest of its merits.
More important is the fact that it continually calls attention to
matters requiring such attention.

Much of his discourse was about the optimum means of arrangement of the
system, there was an art to laying out the cards. As the patient further
explained, to meet the objection that loose cards may easily be mislaid,
cards may be tabbed with numbers from one to ten. When arranged in the
drawer, these tabs proceed from left to right across the drawer and the
absence of a single card can thus easily be detected. The cards are
further arranged between coloured guide cards. As an alternative to
tabbed cards, signal flags may be used. Here, metal clips may be
attached to the top end of the card and that stand out like guides. For
use of the system in relation to dates of the month, the card is printed
with the numbers 1 to 31 at the top. The metal clip is placed as a
signal to indicate the card is to receive attention on the specified
day. Within a large organisation a further card can be drawn up to
assign responsibility for processing that date’s cards. There were
numerous means of working the cards, special techniques for integrating
them into any type of research or organisation, means by which indexes
operating on indexes could open mines of information and expand the
knowledge and capabilities of mankind.

As he pressed me further, I began to experiment with such methods myself
by withdrawing data from the sanatorium’s records and transferring it to
cards in the night. The advantages of the system are overwhelming.
Cards, cut to the right mathematical degree of accuracy, arrayed readily
in drawers, set in cabinets of standard sizes that may be added to at
ease, may be apportioned out amongst any number of enquirers, all of
whom may work on them independently and simultaneously. The bound book,
by contrast, may only be used by one person at a time and that must stay
upon a shelf itself referred to by an index card system. I began to set
up a structure of rows of mirrors on chains and pulleys and a set of
levered and hinged mechanical arms to allow me to open the drawers and
to privately consult my files from any location within the sanatorium.
The clarity of the image is however so far too much effaced by the
diffusion of light across the system.

It must further be borne in mind that a system thus capable of
indefinite expansion obviates the necessity for hampering a researcher
with furniture or appliances of a larger size than are immediately
required. The continuous and orderly sequence of the cards may be
extended further into the domain of furniture and to the conduct of
business and daily life. Reasoning, reference and the order of ideas
emerging as they embrace and articulate a chaotic world and then
communicate amongst themselves turning the world in turn into something
resembling the process of thought in an endless process of consulting,
rephrasing, adding and sorting.

For the patient, ideas flowed like a force of life, oblivious to any
unnatural limitation. Thought became, with the proper use of the system,
part of the stream of life itself. Thought moved through the cards not
simply at the superficial level of the movement of fingers and the
mechanical sliding and bunching of cards, but at the most profound
depths of the movement between reality and our ideas of it. The
organisational grace to be found in arrangement, classification and
indexing still stirred the remnants of his nervous system until the last
day.
