# Acknowledgments 

I would first like to thank those people without whose help and
dedication this work would simply not exist. First off, my friend,
advisor, and all around compañero, Geert Lovink. You rock. Thank you, so
much, for everything. I would also like to thank his able assistant and
my editor, Miriam Rasch for her cheerful support and keen eye for detail
and ideas regarding how to structure this book. Thanks Miriam!

I would like to thank Victor Vitanza for listening to and reading my
ideas and his support as I developed this line of research. I would also
like to thank my friend and colleague Greg Elmer for his keen
perspectives and sharp observations over the past few years – his
guidance has been excellent and timely. I would like to thank my friend
and former boss, Debbie Miller. She was the best – from Macromedia to
Apple to Napster, she collected me for some of the most exciting day
jobs I've ever had. I would like to thank my high school friend, David
Gresh, because he didn't want to work for his mom at the library, so I
got his job shelving books. I would like to thank my wife, Beth
Scannell, and my daughter, Elizabeth Warwick, for putting up with all my
craziness. I love you both, so very very much.

I would like to thank Aaron Swartz, to whose memory this volume is
dedicated – you fought the good fight and you are deeply missed. And
finally, I would especially like to thank those people presently running
the publishing conglomerates – books, music, movies, etc.; the captains
of the cultural industry itself. Because without your incessant
badgering, hectoring, and bottomless mindless lunatic greed, none of
this would have ever been necessary.

Henry Warwick, May 2014
