# It’s a Numbers Game 

> Never underestimate the bandwidth of a minivan full of multi-terabyte
> hard drives hurtling down the highway.
>
> Henry Warwick (2012)

The Library of Congress contains about 35 million books. Some are longer
than others, but each book would likely be less than one megabyte in
size if it was reduced to a text file (.txt) on a computer. The math is
simple: one byte = one typed alphabetic character. One page of text
contains about 2,000 characters, so one million bytes, aka one megabyte
(MB) would hold about 500 pages of text data. Most books are much less
than 500 pages – any visit to a library or bookstore will provide ample
evidence of that. Still, the math is straightforward and powerful: 35
million books equal roughly 35 million MB, or 35 terabytes (TB). If the
average length of a book is 350 pages, then the whole of the Library of
Congress would fit in less space – a 24 TB drive. If the average length
is 250 pages, it would fit on an 18 TB drive with a little room to
spare. It just so happens that one can purchase a 20 TB drive for about
\$2000 as of this writing. The costs of storage are expected to
continually decrease over time. These numbers form a simple calculation
of how to corral the entire book collection of the Library of Congress,
*the largest library in the history of civilisation*.

Obviously, most people don’t need 35 million books. And many people,
especially scholars, do need pagination for referencing, and pagination
is something not found in .txt files. A more obvious choice in digital
book formats would be a paginated form such as the Portable Document
File format (PDF). There are many issues and problems with that format,
especially in relation to different e-reader devices. Still, setting
those issues aside, we can use PDF as a kind of measure point, where the
average book can fit into a 5 MB PDF file. Again, the math is
straightforward. 35 million books equal 175 TB of storage in PDF format.
Indeed most libraries don’t have a million books, much less thirty-five.
I have visited several local libraries and simply asked: ‘How many books
are in your library?’ Answers ranged from 40,000 to 100,000 books. I
asked librarians at Ryerson University Toronto, the university where I
teach, how many books are in the Ryerson Library. While no one knew
exactly, they all guessed the same number; about 500,000. 500,000 books,
each a PDF 5 MB in size, equals 2.5 TB for the whole Ryerson Library. In
2013 a 3 TB drive can be acquired for less than \$180. A large local
library of 100,000 books put in PDF format, can presently fit on a 1 TB
drive that costs less than \$75. A small local library of 10,000 books
could fit on a 64 GB thumb drive the size of a pack of chewing gum and
costing perhaps \$40. This is an astounding fact, with immense
implications. People are acting on this information, both in terms of
building and propagating such digital, offline libraries as well as
trying to prevent such portable libraries from flourishing.

It is trivially simple to start collecting e-books, marshalling them
into libraries on hard drives, and then to share the results. And it is
much less trivially important. *Sharing is caring*. Societies where
people share, especially ideas, are societies that will naturally
flourish. Where people have plenty of knowledge and information, sharing
this cornucopia of knowledge with others less informed improves both
their lots – those less endowed with information have increased access
and become more informed, and those with much data to share receive
appreciation for their good deed of sharing.

If there is one thing digital media has provided, then it is the
overproduction of data. Cisco Systems, a provider of hardware that
powers the internet, states in its latest edition of their annual
report, the Visual Networking Index Forecast: ‘Annual global IP traffic
will surpass the zettabyte threshold (1.4 zettabytes) by the
end of 2017. In 2017, global IP traffic will reach 1.4 zettabytes per
year, or 120.6 exabytes per month. Global IP traffic will reach
1.0 zettabytes per year or 83.8 exabytes per month in 2015.’ And this
remarkable figure: ‘ *In 2017, the gigabyte equivalent of all movies
ever made will cross global IP networks every 3 minutes.*Global IP
networks will deliver 13.8 petabytes every 5 minutes in 2017.’
[^bodytext-01_1]

These are stunning numbers. 1.4 zettabytes (ZB) is
1,400,000,000,000,000,000,000 bytes. Remember, the Library of Congress
book collection in PDF was 174 TB. That would be 174,000,000,000,000
bytes. From this, we can calculate that Cisco is predicting that in a
few years, the amount of data traffic would equal 8,275,680 Libraries of
Congress book collections (in PDF format) that year and *even more the
following*.

This explosion of data – this knowledge – is materially contextualised
in computer systems, and as such it is also ‘gated’ by access to
electricity and the intellectual property regime of proprietarian
capital. As electrification expands and thus reduces that gating factor,
the proprietarian regime of copyright enforcement soon follows, seeking
to narrow the ability to freely transmit and share knowledge, so as to
take advantage of an artificial scarcity against a huge demand, one
growing fastest in the poorest areas. Cisco notes: ‘IP traffic is
growing fastest in the Middle East and Africa, followed by Asia Pacific.
Traffic in the Middle East and Africa will grow at a CAGR of 38 percent
between 2012 and 2017.’ [^bodytext-01_2]

The knowledge provided by whistleblowers like Edward Snowden has made it
very clear that there is no privacy online. There is no truly private
sharing of knowledge in the online realm with this vast sea of
information. As a response, people are naturally led to an atavistic and
reversalist workaround. *The radical tactics of the offline*: abandoning
the online for more secure offline transfer.

## OFFLINE FILE SHARING 

Offline file sharing was known in the 1990s as ‘Sneakernet’, where
someone with data would put it on a floppy disk, and walk it to another
computer. Online file sharing eliminated the need for that. With the new
precarity of the online, the logical choice is a transformed return, a
*reversalism*to the Sneakernet. The differences today, however, are
tremendous. A floppy disk held 1.4 megabytes of data. Today an
inexpensive 1 TB hard drive can hold more text than a human being could
possibly read in one lifetime, as it would result in approximately
500,000,000 pages. If one lives to be eighty, one would have to read
about seven books a day every day from cradle to grave.

This is where the once quotidian practice of the Sneakernet gains a
radicality far beyond what it once held – the simple act of sharing
shifts from a lengthy novel to an *entire library*. One simple act of
generosity can transform the life of a student, a scholar, or an entire
city. By returning to an earlier and more secure form of exchange with
contemporary devices, the quality of the exchange is amplified. The ‘old
joke’ with Sneakernet was: ‘Never underestimate the bandwidth of a
station wagon full of tapes hurtling down the highway.’
[^bodytext-01_3] The new metric: ‘Never underestimate the
bandwidth of a minivan filled with multi-terabyte hard drives hurtling
down the highway.’

Through sharing files via offline systems, and the copying and
exchanging of these offline systems, a new device has come to the fore –
the Personal Portable Library. Because it focuses on the sharing of
e-books, the Personal Portable Library doesn't only refer to Sneakernet,
but to the key function libraries had for thousands of years prior to
the invention of the printing press: Libraries as centers for copying
data. Libraries as warehouses where books are stored are a comparatively
recent phenomenon. A Personal Portable Library takes the contemporary
notion of warehousing knowledge to the hard drive and feeds into its own
history. The library-as-warehouse is now a copy, but while scrolls or
codices of centuries ago took years to copy – today, many thousands of
books can be copied in minutes.

All throughout the development of the digital world, from the Sneakernet
on, publishing industries have had a variable relationship with file
sharing, ranging from draconian rage (viz. MPAA, RIAA) to benign neglect
(viz. Microsoft’s meagre defence to the sharing of MS Office in the
1990s) to outright support (viz. the fact that the internet basically
runs on Free or Open Source Software such as Apache Server
technologies). Insofar as corporations fight or promote file sharing,
they hinder or help realize the dream of universal access to knowledge.
Unfortunately, the most draconian of the lot seem to be driving the
debate.

The theoretical implications surrounding this practice are immense and
would easily fill another book or three. Rather than diving deeply into
how the Personal Portable Library reframes our theory of property, or
how it operates in the philosophies surrounding Access to Knowledge
theory, I will explore the basic ideas of what these new Personal
Portable Libraries are, their place in history, and how to make one.

## ON PIRACY 

Computers, by their nature, copy. Typing this line, the computer has
copied the text multiple times in a variety of memory registers. I touch
a button to type a letter, this releases a voltage that is then
translated into digital value, which is then copied into a memory buffer
and sent to another part of the computer, copied again into RAM and sent
to the graphics card where it is copied again, and so on. The entire
operation of a computer is built around copying data: copying is one of
the most essential characteristics of computer science. One of the
ontological facts of digital storage is that there is no difference
between a computer program, a video, mp3-song, or an e-book. They are
all composed of voltage represented by ones and zeros. Therefore they
are all subject to the same electronic fact: *they exist to be copied
and can only ever exist as copies.*

It is important in this discussion to understand that people who share
files are not ‘pirates’ and what they are doing is not ‘piracy’. As
Aaron Swartz noted: ‘It’s called stealing or piracy, as if sharing a
wealth of knowledge were the moral equivalent of plundering a ship and
murdering its crew.’ [^bodytext-01_4] Some twelve year old
sharing a sliver of a torrent file from a song by some prefabricated pop
star on his computer in his mother’s air conditioned basement is not a
pirate, and in the context of this discussion, such language is
offensive. From a perspective of cooperation and communal activity, it
was immensely foolish and a gross strategic error that file sharing
networks chose to take the Pirate epithet as their emblem and run with
it.

The arguments are ill-advised, and should be addressed:

*People who have shared files outside of copyright regulations have been
called ‘pirates’ for centuries.* \
And it was the forces of capital and property that applied this name as
an epithet. Information sharing was no more piracy then, than it is
today. Letting the opposition control the terms of debate means the
debate is lost. Letting other people define one’s behaviour as piracy
means that all discussion will be framed in terms of classical property
theory, and it is the framing of classical property theory that is an
essential problem to the debate.

*We (filesharers) take up ‘Pirate’ like the LGBT community
reappropriated ‘Gay’ or ‘Queer’.* \
People who fileshare are not subjected to mob murder or the torment of
chemical castration at the hands of the state. [^bodytext-01_5]
It is true that file sharers are subject to repressive laws – there have
been moves in the U.S. Congress that, had they been enacted, would have
resulted in someone who shared a song by Michael Jackson facing more
time in prison than the doctor who actually killed him.
[^bodytext-01_6] This, of course, is ludicrous. The bravery of
the LGBTQ community to appropriate ‘Gay’ and ‘Queer’ was of an order of
magnitude more courageous than online activists appropriating ‘Pirate’
given the violence and brutality LGBTQ people have faced over centuries
of oppression. Secondly, LGBTQ rights activists did so in a particular
historical context where ‘shock’ value in cultural gestures had
traction; from Chris Burden to Karen Finley to Andres Serrano. By the
time file sharing came of age in the late 1990s and early 2000s, there
was little left to shock. Hence, calling oneself a Pirate is a good bit
more facile and cynical and ‘late to the game’ than it seems.

*Pirate societies on pirate boats were run in a very egalitarian manner,
as compared to privateers.* \
This is a red herring. The internal social conditions of a pirate
society is of zero consequence if it is made of pirates – an egalitarian
society of murderous thugs is still composed of murderous thugs.

*Pirates have a certain ‘romantic’ appeal as swashbuckling rogues which
helps in marketing the file sharing mode of distribution. \
*The romantic appeal of Pirates is more a reflection of capitalist
self-delusion, as capitalism itself is a piratical system that extracts
resources and exploits others, often brutally and mortally.

In short, there is no reason to use the term ‘piracy’. Pirates don’t
change the idea of property – they reinforce it. Hunter-gatherers
chasing the bison herds didn’t have pirates – the idea makes no sense.
What are the terms for file sharing? That is a discussion well worth
having. I will not use the term piracy, as it is inapplicable to the
activity or philosophy of file sharing and bears no relation to the kind
of society file sharing anticipates. I would also suggest the Pirate
Party restructure itself so as to take advantage of what leaving the
epithet ‘Piracy’ behind can offer.

## BASICS OF THE PERSONAL PORTABLE LIBRARY 

I started developing an e-book library in 2005. I found a (now defunct)
website with an odd name, something like welovephotoshop.com, and they
had about 100 books on philosophy available for download. I downloaded
them all. I then spent a lot of time on archive.org and gutenberg.org,
searching for books I was interested in. Archive.org was more varied
than Gutenberg, and Gutenberg wasn’t keen on PDF. Gutenberg’s collection
consisted of things that had been available in the public domain for a
long time. Finding contemporary materials there was impossible. When I
started my PhD program in 2008, I discovered aaaaarg.org. At the time it
had about 10,000 e-books and documents, and much of it fairly current.
So, over Christmas I downloaded the entire archive, book by book. In the
end I had a duplicate of aaaaarg.org on my hard drive, arranged by
author. I spent a few months fixing files names and filing each document
into folders labelled from A through Z, and one with a \#, for authors
with number names. At the time, aaaaarg.org had a daily mailing on what
had been uploaded that day. This allowed for a quick and easy way to
update my library. Later that year, I met a student who had about 2000
books on his drive. We shared our files, and that put me up at around
13,000 books. Later I made a master directory filled with folders based
on fields of interest. I called it ‘Library’ as opposed to the
alphabetical Archive and put them both on separate drives to insure a
back up.

After an illuminating conversation on my dissertation topic with my
advisor Geert Lovink, I looked into my actual practices. One of them was
this offline library. I shifted my research to my practice, and moulded
my practice around my research. During the research process I discovered
library.nu, Library Genesis (libgen), and other online library systems.
Library.nu and libgen are both discussed later. While researching
offline libraries, I found that a huge collection of e-books isn’t all
that useful, even if it’s divided into folders by author and/or folders
by interest. For example, I want to look up a specific book. I remember
the author’s name starts with D and it’s on philosophy. The library
consists of 46,000 books using 200 GB of drive space and the directory
for authors with a D alone has 2787 titles. I remember that it’s a book
of Philosophy or Rhetoric. So, I go to my subject oriented directories,
and find that the Philosophy and Rhetoric folder has 7545 files. If I
select all the files that have authors starting with a D, I still get
584 entries. This is a suboptimal method of researching digital files,
to say the least.

My operating system can index e-books, however the resulting index is so
huge, that it makes the computer sluggish. I looked into acquiring an
indexer. The best are Copernic, DTSearch, and Dropout. DTSearch is the
fastest, but it’s also the most expensive at \$199. It’s a very powerful
piece of software allowing for a range of Boolean and proximity
searches. Copernic is nearly as good. Copernic has a free, very limited
[^bodytext-01_7] , version. The paid version is quite powerful,
although it’s a bit slower than DTSearch. Copernic only costs about
\$50. Then there is Dropout.

Dropout is free (as in beer) software and uses the Apache Lucene search
engine. It is not as easy or as fast as either Copernic or DTSearch, but
the price is right, and it works. One thing that is extremely useful
about Dropout is its portability. You simply place the program itself,
dropout.exe, in the directory you want to index. Then you let it index
that directory (if you have 45,000 books, it will take about a week) and
it will produce a file called ‘SearchIndex’ within the directory. While
none of these indexing systems work on the Macintosh or Linux operating
system – they require Windows OS – Dropout has the advantage of
portability.

Indexed in Dropout, the drive can be attached to any Windows OS computer
and run without the need to re-compile the index. This also means that
the entire system, index and all, can be copied to another drive,
creating instant pre-indexed research libraries. Copying an entire drive
can be slow, depending on the size of the library and the speed of the
system. USB3 is much faster, and Apple Thunderbolt even faster, and USB4
is likely to be faster still. Using these systems, copying 45,000 books
can take a few hours up to an entire day. Even if it takes a day, one
still has a library of indexed 45,000 books.

Every time Dropout is opened, it will go through the entire directory
and check its index. Luckily, once indexed, the checking process goes
quickly. If one has added files to the library between indexations,
Dropout re-indexes the books. With no changes to an index of about
45,000 books, using my old HP i3 laptop running Windows 7, Dropout will
take about 30 seconds to run through its IndexSearch file and make sure
that everything is correct. With 100 additions to the library, Dropout
takes about 5 minutes to re-index.

Over time, my research practice changed into a routine, where over the
period of a week, I would collect e-books, documents, reports, papers,
et cetera, usually totalling somewhere around 100-200 documents. On
Saturday morning, I’ll sort the documents into the subject categories in
my Library, and then into the alphabetic directories by author in the
Archive. Then I’ll open up Dropout in the Library and let it run while I
go have some breakfast. When I get back I’ll run Dropout in Archive.

In curating my Personal Portable Library, I developed a number of
different categories of interest that continue to evolve. These
categories grow organically as I need them, and are by no means some
kind of definitive statement or epistemology. For example, there was a
folder for Art that grew quickly, turned into Art and Aesthetics and
then rapidly branched out into Architecture and Urbanism,
Art-Photography, Art History, Art Instruction, Film & Video-practice,
Film & Video-theory, Film, Theatre, Video Scripts, Literature, Museums,
Dance, Music, Audio, and Design. This continuous re-shuffling of files
isn’t very productive; an inefficiency that underlines the usefulness of
software like Calibre, a powerful e-book management system, especially
insofar as one may use an e-reader device, such as an iPad or a Kindle.
Metadata is found online and automatically associated to the file in the
Calibre system itself. It can easily convert files from one format to
another, place them on a variety of devices, collect metadata on an
e-book from multiple sources, and is a generally useful manager.
However, it does not index e-books – *it merely manages them*.

That’s it in a nutshell. Download books. Index them. But wait, there’s
more – because when you build a Personal Portable Library, you are
entering into the rich and highly contested world of libraries. When you
have a library, you have access to knowledge, and to paraphrase a line
from Michel Foucault, *Knowledge Is Power*, so access to knowledge gives
you access to power. Library power is different however – it is a power
that inherently ennobles and amplifies the good in people – a power that
thrives on being linked and shared, because simply, *sharing is
caring*and the sharing of knowledge is the essential purpose of a
library. When you collect e-books, it is practical to share them with
friends and build a personal network, as copies build resilience against
hardware failure.

Personal Portable Libraries don’t necessarily have to be filled with
e-books, and often they aren’t. People frequently trade devices filled
with recordings of music in mp3 files, in fact most file sharing is done
using offline means, much more so than online means.
[^bodytext-01_8] By focusing here on the case of e-books and the
Personal Portable Library, we are thrust directly into the
contradictions of Intellectual Property, human rights, and the
exigencies of the digital. Although this ties us to a specific modality
and technique and to a particular historical juncture, by surrendering
some of the broadness of an ‘offline file sharing system’ and looking at
the more concrete example of a Personal Portable Library, we gain a
great deal of historical context, continuity, and strength. The research
can be followed by and extended to other media that have greater storage
requirements and different relationships to Intellectual Property.

## ONLINE AND OFFLINE – BREAD AND BUTTER 

Offline file systems exist in a relationship with online file systems.
How to acquire these online files varies depending on the architecture
of the system in question. This is where online and offline systems
complement each other. In terms of files that are less infringing on the
belligerent hypertrophied proprietarian regimes of capital, the
aforementioned archive.org and gutenberg.org are useful. Both have an
extraordinary collection of e-books and linkages to library systems
where the e-books are available. For those in need of more recent
material, it is very simple to go to amazon.com or barnsandnoble.com or
any other website and purchase e-books. If your research requires books
that are not in the public domain, and your budget, location, or
inclination is such that you can’t afford, access, or abide Amazon et
al, then acquisition is less straightforward and devolves to P2P
torrents and permutations of data locker technology.

### DATA LOCKERS 

While there are many different types of data lockers, the fundamental
architecture can be contrasted with P2P. In the following chart we see a
basic P2P system, the arrows showing the flow of data.

![FIGURE 1. P2P STRUCTURE VIS A VIS FILE LOCATIONS.
AUTHOR.](imgs/p2p.png)

FIGURE 1. P2P STRUCTURE VIS A VIS FILE LOCATIONS. BY THE AUTHOR.

The systems that contain the data belong to individuals and files are
directly exchanged from one drive to the other through the internet.
There is an intermediary (labeled ‘P2P ORG’), the amount of control,
interference or value the intermediary provides or inserts is variable.
For example at Napster, the Napster database was controlling. Other more
decentralised systems, such as the gnutella network, are less so, due to
the structure of gnutella style file sharing. The fundamental point is
that individuals in the public realm have drives with files on them, and
through the internet their computers directly communicate and send files
(or in the case of torrents, parts of files) to each other. This puts
them in a position of equality to one another – all are free to trade
with all, and their collective libraries of files create a positive
commons of contribution. Through chat systems, blogs, and other social
media, they are able to form communities of preference and trust that
increase the value of the data aggregate as a distributed commons. Also
they can create more or less active file sharing sub-networks, again
formed through trust and preference.

The difference with data lockers is stark:

![FIGURE 2: DATA LOCKER STRUCTURE AND FILE LOCATION.
AUTHOR.](imgs/locker.png)

FIGURE 2: DATA LOCKER STRUCTURE AND FILE LOCATION. BY THE AUTHOR.

Whether the locker is the iTunes Music Store (iTMS) or one of the
popular ‘File Hosting’ or ‘Cloud Storage’ systems, they all share this
fundamental structure which is radically different from Napster’s P2P
structure or torrent systems. It is important to remember that ‘Cloud
Storage’ is usually one particular type of data locker. In the data
locker system depicted above, there are individual users (John and Jane)
who connect to the file locker service. There are variations at this
point. Some systems, such as iTMS or Amazon, require payment for the
release of data from their servers to the user. Other systems, such as
those of the cloud storage companies, only require a proper URL
directing the user to the desired file location.

The similarities between cloud storage companies and commercial data
sales companies (iTMS, Amazon, etc.) are striking. The only real
significant difference is one largely derived of policy around a few
questions: can one download a file from the system at no cost? Can one
upload a file of one’s choice that others can download at no cost?
Otherwise, their fundamental architectures are very similar.

### THE POLITICS OF DATA LOCKERS 

The fundamental structure of data lockers is in keeping with the
structure of neoliberal consumerism: people as individuals contact a
corporation that provides them commodities. Whether these commodities
come at a cost or are freely distributed is not part of the
architectural question – that is simply a gatekeeping variable. Even
free data locker sites shape and manage bandwidth to prevent people from
downloading too many files at once or too often. Comparing and
contrasting the two architectures, one might think that a genuine P2P
system fosters community and a positive commons of data, while a data
locker atomizes its clientele as consumers of a service. Some data
lockers, such as aaaaarg.org have a more active community than a
commercial system like mediafire.com, while both operate from a similar
architecture of data flow to user. Early P2P systems such as Napster had
chat groups allowing peers direct contact to share their taste and
interests, creating relationships between them. Through these trust
systems, filter bubbles were assembled around these relationships and
interests, strengthening the community and promoting the transfer of
data in that community.

Shortage creates opportunity for profit. If something is ubiquitous and
undesired, it has no value. If something is desired and ubiquitous, it
is also unvalued as its exploitation cannot be a source of profit. With
a shortage against a demand, there is profit to be made. In the case of
Napster it was different, the shortage lay in access to the Napster
database and the trusted networks of preference it spawned through its
chat system – networks of users and user preferences based on their file
sets. What was *not* in shortage were the assets (music files), as they
were in the possession of the members of the network forming these
communities of preference.

Data locker systems have no such need for communities of preference;
they are handled by reference systems, such as blogs or social media.
These systems see users as atomized individuals seeking access to their
data stored in servers. A user comes to the locker and asks permission
to download one of the millions of files in store. If it is a commercial
system (iTMS, Amazon) the gatekeeper answers ‘Pay up first.’ If the user
pays, then the server sends the file to the user. If it is a file
sharing cloud storage system, the user comes to the system with a
request for a URL that is specific to a certain file held on the cloud
storage server. The gatekeeper drops a cookie on the user’s system, to
manage the use of the system by the user.

The file may have been uploaded to the cloud storage system by a user,
but this doesn’t alter the underlying general architecture of the
system. For example, in iTMS independent musicians can upload files to
sell in the iTunes system. While iTMS sees the musician as a different
kind of user, they are individual users nonetheless. The customer-user
pays money to download a file from iTMS; the musician-user must pay to
upload a file to iTMS by allowing iTMS a cut of the money charged in
downloading. In this way, the architecture of the exchange enforces a
conservative individualistic approach and a notion of neoliberal
identity and property relations, a monetization of commodities, as
opposed to a more radical community of sharing which is inherent to P2P
file sharing.

### DATA LOCKERS AND COPYRIGHT 

Data lockers require a neoliberal international system in both a
positive and negative manner. Negative in that they need the free flow
of data across borders to avoid parochial differences in intellectual
property law – there is no boundary to distribution. Positive in that
they can then take advantage of these same asymmetries in intellectual
property law to their own advantage. Without the free flow of data these
systems cannot operate in multiple markets. But even if the markets have
differing restrictions imposed by local authority, the data locker
systems naturally adjust to them. An example is the American Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) which has a ‘safe harbour’ clause
allowing for the storage of copyrighted data by a hosting system. When a
complaint is lodged about a given piece of data that may be copyrighted,
the data must be made unavailable.

This creates an asymmetry in time, a delay, a space between the file
being uploaded and then taken down for copyright infringement. There are
other active axes in this system: vigilance of the rights holder,
economic value of the data, copyright terms of the file in question, and
a variety of other issues. Any of these can speed up or hinder finding
and taking down the infringing file. The ideology of globalist certainty
and the ubiquity of international IP systems inherent to neoliberal
doctrine foster confidence in these systems to continue their efforts in
the potentiality of universal distribution of data. Of course, in a
neoliberal system all this comes at a cost, measured in money.

The consumerist model is plainly visible in the structure of data locker
systems – the user is a unique individual who seeks a commodity, held
scarce behind the firewalls, procedures and requirements of the data
locker corporation. Even if the consumer of data isn’t charged, he or
she is still an individual consumer, not necessarily part of any
community or network – not even necessarily human. However, the user in
such a system is an isolated individual who has no name and is reduced
to an IP address. The only thing required is a code, and thus the file
sharing actually happens between fields of codes, behind which humans
are said to lurk.

At the same time, the data locker system is dependent, indeed, vampiric
and parasitic on community based systems. Data lockers are simply giant
closets in the cloud filled with files, and people need to know how to
find the files they want. Some have search engines built in, but they
don’t act like filters. Over the years blogs have taken on this role of
being a guide to files. Users find a download link to a file in the data
locker through these blogs. Contrastingly, P2P system Napster didn’t
store copyrighted data, and was not in control of the direct
transmission of the data itself; it merely set up the conditions by
which data could be transmitted from peer to peer. Through a chat client
Napster created social value and facilitated the filtering of data
between users as they formed communities of interest. The database of
users and their files used to make the file sharing connections was
their undoing.

Datalocker architecture such as iTMS, Amazon, Spotify, Netflix, MedNet,
Rdio, JSTOR, and others, allows file transfers or the streaming of
media,. Other data lockers are more engaged with letting people store
their files in the ‘cloud’ (i.e., on internet servers) and make them
available to others, such as Mediafire, Rapidshare, DepositFiles, and
others. These data lockers came with front-end assemblies that enabled
non-members to download files. Some of them directly operate with a
locker (like library.nu with ifile.it), while others are more ‘locker
agnostic’ (AVAX) and others sit somewhere in between. One hybrid is
aaaaarg.org, which has its own file storage system but also can link
files in other data lockers.

Rights holding corporations are apprehensive about people banding
together to form communities online, as their interests may not be
consanguineous. As a consequence, P2P systems were and are targeted for
removal as they challenge the fundamental vampiric drive of capitalism:
the complete monetization of all human cultural activity. The level of
stress laid upon these organizations is tremendous and
implosive.[^bodytext-01_9]

Directly managed P2P systems like Napster and similar examples like
Kazaa, Limewire, and Morpheus, all floundered and died in the face of
the same proprietarian juggernaut. They also failed for similar
technical and legalistic reasons. But other file sharing systems were
developed both as competition and as an evolution of P2P. Chief among
them, bittorent.

The torrent system of file sharing continues to this day, and has been
largely successful, even in the face of major setbacks such as the
shutting down of Pirate Bay. It has a number of advantages – by
distributing parts of files among a variety of machines, the torrent
system reduces the signature of a user in terms of a file’s use,
allowing for an arbitrarily large number of files to be shared. There
are downsides to the torrent system. One is its speed – downloading a
file can take days, sometimes weeks, and this means leaving the computer
operating online the entire time while it collects the parts. Another is
the ‘stupidity of the crowds’ – the tastes and interests of crowds can
be abysmally lacking in variety, resulting in millions sharing music by
the *popstar du jour*, while finding a particular piece of writing by an
unpopular author can be difficult and sometimes impossible.

In conclusion, P2P systems are slower than data lockers and operate from
a more communal set of principles. However, while some online sources of
e-books are better known than others, all are precarious. It is this
precarity of the online that makes offline Personal Portable Libraries
so valuable, as they become offline repositories of collections that can
be re-uploaded when proprietarian forces eliminate online sources. In
this way, the offline precedes the online, both historically and
conceptually.

Because of the symbiotic relationship between the online and offline, we
have discussed some basic architectures of the online and how the online
and offline work together to provide information. Other purposes for
offline file sharing systems and Personal Portable Libraries exist, for
the relationship of the online to the offline is of an existential
variety. One does not exist without the other. The online exists inside
the offline, and the online is not so much a thing of its own, as it is
more a connectivity between offlines – all online content is held in
hardware, somewhere. Like neoliberal manufacturing jobs, the hard work
of online storage is done elsewhere, allowing consumers in the
overdeveloped world to think they live in a clean state of virtuality
and information, without armed guards, wires, or steel. On the other
hand, hard drives are cheap, small, capacious, and plentiful, although,
due to their physicality, they are slow to share.

## HOW ARE PERSONAL PORTABLE LIBRARIES USED? 

The use of the offline library has fascinated me since I began, and has
been the hardest part to research. People tend to simply accept what
they can get and can be very idiosyncratic in the usage and development
of their libraries. They can both benefit from and be encumbered by some
offline libraries that are being traded. One that is common is the
Alexandria Project: a folder filled with files arranged by the author’s
last name in subfolders named A through Z. Its size varies – usually
somewhere between 35,000 and 50,000 books – and it is derived from a
combination of aaaaarg.org and libgen.info books.

The benefit of something like the Alexandria Project is that it’s a huge
collection of books that can be used immediately. The downside is that
due to its size, people are less prone to do anything to or with it, as
moving and processing that many files can be quite tedious. This is
where software like Calibre and Dropout comes in very handy. However,
those also require some effort, and many readers are happy to just do
simple searches for a particular document they need. At the same time,
some have built up Alexandria Projects into something different, larger
and more useful. For example, in December 2012 the Makerere University
Business School (MUBS) in Kampala Uganda received 50,000 electronic
books. Three years earlier, four Dutch students from the University of
Amsterdam (New Media and Digital Culture program) visited MUBS to
research ICT implementation in Uganda. During that time, MUBS built a
library, but had little money left over for books or furniture. This
changed in 2012 with a single hard drive with files from the Alexandria
Project. [^bodytext-01_10] Regardless of what happens to that
particular collection of books, the direction is clear: this inexpensive
gift can have a profound impact. It is bound to be an increasingly
popular use of the Personal Portable Library in years to come.

This can be transferred to other arenas, with matters of endocolonial
maldevelopment. From the destitute rural reservations of First Nations
to the abandoned cities of post-collapse America a Personal Portable
Library could mean a transformation. [^bodytext-01_11] These
municipalities have seen their libraries full of paper books closed and
abandoned, the ragged remains of the cities sold off to the highest
bidder in a turgid fit of neoliberal shock doctrine, the domestic
post-industrial brown lots degenerated into toxic latifundia. It is in
this ruined post-urban world where learning and libraries are most
needed. As the costs for Personal Portable Libraries are trivial
compared to paper book libraries, these new digital systems can fill a
desperate need.

* * * * *

[^bodytext-01_1]:  *Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Methodology*,
    2012-2017,
    [http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white\_paper\_c11-481360\_ns827\_Networking\_Solutions\_White\_Paper.html](http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-481360_ns827_Networking_Solutions_White_Paper.html).
    Emphasis in the original. [↩]

[^bodytext-01_2]:  Cisco Systems, *Visual Networking Index*. [↩]

[^bodytext-01_3]:  Andrew S. Tanenbaum, *Computer Networks*, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,
    1996, p. 83. [↩]

[^bodytext-01_4]:  Aaron Swartz, *The Guerilla Open Access Manifesto*. 2008,
    [http://archive.org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008\_djvu.txt](http://archive.org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008_djvu.txt).

[^bodytext-01_5]:  Like the case of Alan Turing.
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan\_Turing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing).

[^bodytext-01_6]:  CBC News, ‘Michael Jackson’s Doctor to Serve Halved Sentence’, *CBC
    News*, 29 November 2011,
    [http://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/story/2011/11/29/jackson-doctor-conrad.html](http://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/story/2011/11/29/jackson-doctor-conrad.html).
    According to the article, ‘Conrad Murray, who served as Michael
    Jackson’s personal physician before the pop superstar’s 2009 death,
    will serve less than two years in jail in Los Angeles, despite being
    sentenced to four years of incarceration for his involuntary
    manslaughter conviction.’ [↩]

[^bodytext-01_7]:  Namely, a 2 GB index file limit. If you only have a few hundred or a
    few thousand books, that shouldn’t be a problem – if your library is
    much larger, then Copernic won’t work. [↩]

[^bodytext-01_8]:  Ernesto, ‘RIAA: Online Music Piracy Pales in Comparison to Offline
    Swapping’, *TorrentFreak*, 26 July 2012,
    [http://torrentfreak.com/riaa-online-music-piracy-pales-in-comparison-to-offline-swapping-120726/](http://torrentfreak.com/riaa-online-music-piracy-pales-in-comparison-to-offline-swapping-120726/).
    In 2011, online file sharing accounted for only 12% of ‘music
    acquisition’, while offline accounted for 46%.

[^bodytext-01_9]:  My experiences as a QA engineer at Napster were instructive, as I
    will relate on the section dedicated to
    [Napster]. [↩]

[^bodytext-01_10]: Albert Mucunguzi, ‘Makerere University Business School (MUBS)
    Receives 50,000 eBooks’, *PC Tech*, 5 December 2012,
    [http://pctechmag.com/2012/12/makerere-university-business-school-mubs-receives-50000-eBooks/](http://pctechmag.com/2012/12/makerere-university-business-school-mubs-receives-50000-eBooks/).
    More examples are from interviews I have had with a number of people
    who have had the good fortune to have an Alexandria Project drive.
    For their sake, they will remain anonymous, but suffice to say, they
    are all active scholars and intellectuals. [↩]

[^bodytext-01_11]: The Shrink to Survive plan was devised by Dan Kildee in Flint, MI.
    The idea has since caught on in several other cities. Detroit has
    actively bulldozed sections of itself, and Gary Indiana is
    considering bulldozing 40% of its land, which is now largely
    abandoned. Nick Bogert, ‘Battered City of Gary, ID, Considers
    Shrinking 40 Percent to Save Itself’, *NBC News*, 19 June 2013,
    [http://inplainsight.nbcnews.com/\_news/2013/06/19/18956862-battered-city-of-gary-ind-considers-shrinking-40-percent-to-save-itself?lite](http://inplainsight.nbcnews.com/_news/2013/06/19/18956862-battered-city-of-gary-ind-considers-shrinking-40-percent-to-save-itself?lite).



# Towards a History of the Personal Portable Library 

> The acquisition of books is by no means a matter of money or expert
> knowledge alone. Not even both factors together suffice for the
> establishment of a real library, which is always somewhat impenetrable
> and at the same time uniquely itself.
>
> Walter Benjamin

To understand how the Personal Portable Library is a logical continuance
of traditional or archaic library systems (i.e., libraries that existed
prior to the printing press and the development of intellectual property
regimes) we must first look at the place of the Personal Portable
Library in a material and rhetorical history. The Personal Portable
Library draws back on different points in the history of libraries and
literacy – as ancient as the clay tablets of Babylonia and the papyrus
scrolls of Egypt, and as contemporary as today’s headlines brought to
you by the internet. Like the libraries of the past, the Personal
Portable Library is a subject of controversy.

The fundamental process of creating a Personal Portable Library is
copying files from one hard drive to another hard drive. Users inhabit
the traditional role of copyist, so to speak. In ancient libraries, you
had your common copyist. The job of copyist was straightforward, but
difficult – he (it was usually a he) had to scrupulously and accurately
copy every letter of every word of a text onto a fresh substrate. In
Babylon, this would be on clay tablets. In ancient Egypt, the preferred
surface was papyrus, parchment in the European late archaic and medieval
period, which in the Renaissance gave way to paper, an invention from
China. As the substrates – papyrus, vellum, parchment, paper – had a
limited span of use that declined with greater contact, texts needed to
be copied. Especially those that were foundational to an ideological
state apparatus, as the Bible is for religion. In a medieval or
Renaissance context, copying books required significant effort and skill
that was honed by years of training under a writing Master. If
concentration was broken in the slightest then errors occurred, and the
repair was often difficult, time consuming, and expensive. Thus, the
workflow and practice of the copyist created precarities unique to the
writing profession.

## THE ANGEL OF THE DIGITAL: PROTECTING DIGITAL SCRIBES AND COPYISTS 

In a process of common magical thinking, each medieval profession had a
patron saint that would protect the worker in that profession from harm
in the execution of their duties. For example, the patron saint of
fishermen was St. Andrew, tanners relied on St. Bartholomew, and
libraries had St. Jerome as their patron. With hundreds of saints,
nearly every profession and every ailment has a patron saint – St.
Maurice guards over knife sharpeners as St. Dymphna protects lunatics
and St. Bernadine of Siena is the patron saint of the lungs and chest.
There are even patron saints for more contemporary professions – St.
Hubert for machinists, St. John-Francis Regis for social workers, and
St. Columba for ‘bookbinders; the Knights of Columbus; plagiarists;
poets; Ireland; Scotland’ [^bodytext-02_1] . One saint – St.
Expedite – has even been appropriated by computer hackers.
[^bodytext-02_2] With such semi-divine protection fishermen might
not be lost at sea, knife sharpeners and machinists might keep their
fingers, plagiarists continue plagiarizing, and presumably computer
hackers continue merrily hacking away.

Copyists, however, had a different set of problems, mostly all forms of
distraction. A distracted copyist is prone to error, and errors once
made became consistent over time. The copyist did not need a patron
saint to protect them – they needed a supernatural scapegoat. When ink
was spilt or a word misspelled, the cry rang out to curse the
distracting demon who torments all copyists: Titivillus. Thus, through
the material necessities of their work, copyists didn’t have a patron
saint – they had a patron demon. [^bodytext-02_3]

The digital copyists of the Personal Portable Library don’t have to face
such horrors; with simple measures, especially the basic responsibility
of backing up data, most digital errors can be fixed. Assuming that the
files on a back up drive are working, the idea of ‘error’ is not nearly
as critical or even relevant. Aesthetic choices become less problematic
with adequate search facilities, metadata, and curation. So the Personal
Portable Library copyist has no need for a demon, but for a patron saint
or angel, like any other profession. Following the precedence of hackers
in appropriating St. Expedite, it makes sense to appeal to and
appropriate a figure deeply associated with vast knowledge, and as it so
happens, there is an archangel especially associated with Universal
Knowledge. Pre-echoed and pre-mediated for our anticipation of its
culmination in contemporary media, we now bear witness and behold
Metatron, the Recording Angel, patron of Personal Portable Libraries, as
revealed by his ‘prophet’, Sol Yurick in 1985.

> *Behold! Metatron, the Recording Angel and patron of Personal Portable
> Libraries* [^bodytext-02_4]

Metatron is a very special angel: ‘Metatron is perhaps the greatest of
all the heavenly hierarchs, the 1st (as also the last) of the 10
archangels of the Briatic world. He has been called the king of angels,
prince of the divine face or presence, chancellor of Heaven, angel of
the covenant, chief of the ministering angels, and the lesser YHWH (the
tetragrammaton). He is charged with the sustenance of mankind.’
[^bodytext-02_5]

The details of Metatron are complex, and related to the occult and
mystical Judaist schools of Qaballah. [^bodytext-02_6] Simply, it
works like this: one cannot see the Godhead – when one is dealing with
God, one is actually dealing with Metatron. God is perfect and beyond
knowledge, so the archangel Metatron mediates between God and humans.
Between these two realms is knowledge – the entrance point to the realm
of angels. Metatron, who is often depicted writing in a book, is the
protector of knowledge. Thus, through a mythological lens the Personal
Portable Library can be seen as a weak, microscopic, partial, and
hopelessly inadequate material reflection of the complete universal
knowledge in the mind of Metatron, the archangel of the Divine
Countenance.

The sustenance of mankind is electronic and under the auspices of
Metatron the Recording Angel, which is especially poignant: for ‘man
does not live by bread alone, but also by the communication of words’
[^bodytext-02_7] ; and the Personal Portable Library is the
radical distribution and copying of words to all mankind, the psychic,
intellectual, digitally operant food for all mankind.

Protection is valuable, for centers of copying and the retention of
knowledge have been consistently targeted for destruction and oppression
by rigid ideologies. The Personal Portable Library is no exception. Foes
of free thinking, the enemies of free knowledge – be they religious
zealots, business profiteers, or political ideologues – frequently
target libraries in their quest for power over the minds of others, and
continue to do so to this very day as libraries expand into the realm of
the digital. The scholars and students who need these libraries could
use some protection, however insubstantial.

On the more mundane political plane, there is also the matter of one’s
right to Access to Knowledge as noted in the UN Declaration of Universal
Human Rights, Article 27, section 1: ‘Everyone has the right to freely
participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and
to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.’ This forms the
ethical foundation (and protection) for the Personal Portable Library,
and, indeed, for the entire Access to Knowledge Movement. It is through
a re-engagement with the purposes and methods of ancient libraries and
the history of the Public Library that contemporary digital archives of
shared files can regain meaningful purpose. Then the enclosure and
warehousing of knowledge by the modern library might also be recognized
as the destructive historical aberration it is.

## ANCIENT LIBRARIES 

The components of the earliest library known is a collection of clay
tablets discovered in 1975 by the Italian archaeologist Paolo Matthiae,
in the ancient city of Ebla, in contemporary Syria. The city was
destroyed in ca. 2250 BCE, and the texts were from ca. 2500 – 2250 BCE.
Some 20,000 tablets and fragments of tablets were found. It is very
likely that there were thousands more documents because at that
historical time there were other writing surfaces available (boards and
papyrus). The archives contain royal ordinances, edicts, treaties, lists
of place names, trade records, dictionaries, and syllabaries of Sumerian
associated with Eblaite pronunciations, copybooks, lists of lexicons,
scratch pads for students, king’s lists, and other educational material.
After several invasions over a period of millennia, Ebla was finally
abandoned in the eighth century CE. [^bodytext-02_8]

The development of libraries continued in both the Middle East and
China, with a significant milestone in the library of King Ashurbanipal
II who assembled a huge library in Nineveh. The expansion of his library
came through the production of clay tablets and pillage from defeated
subject and client states of the Assyrian Empire. Included in the
library were some of the great works of ancient Near Eastern mythology,
including the Epic of Gilgamesh, the Enuma Elish creation story, the
myth of the First Man, Adapa, and other similar foundational narratives.
Once acquired, a tablet was usually copied as soon as possible. While
clay tablets can last indefinitely, they were fragile, and prone to
shatter if dropped. This copying of clay tablets leads to a central
feature and a major function of any library (until the rise of the
printing press): *its use as a copy-making center*. This was especially
true of the library at Alexandria.

### THE LIBRARY OF ALEXANDRIA 

Shortly after its founding by Alexander III of Macedon in ca. 330 BCE,
Alexandria became the main point for grain export from the Nile Delta
and the centre for papyrus trade [^bodytext-02_9] – the substrate
for data inscription in the form of scrolls. Much has been written about
the fabled library of Alexandria. At the time, it was the largest
library in the world. Eventually it came to hold approximately 490,000
scrolls in the main building and 42,800 in the ‘daughter’ building, a
total of about 532,800 scrolls at its peak. [^bodytext-02_10] To
compare: that is roughly the size of the library.nu website before its
vaporization at the hands of the proprietarian jihad against file
sharing.

A major innovation at the Library of Alexandria was by its first
director, Zenodotus. With thousands of scrolls to organize, Zenodotus
had to ascertain the identity of the author of the scroll and scan the
content to give it a proper tag. Once tagged, the scrolls were organized
by type; religious, literary, scientific, factual, philosophical, etc.
From there proceeded a secondary sorting according to form (poetry,
theatre, etc.) or genre (myths, omens, prophecies, origins, etc.). Once
sorted, the scrolls were semi-alphabetized and tagged with the given
section (say, theatre). There was no alphabetization beyond the first
letter, and further alphabetization would not happen until the second
century CE. [^bodytext-02_11] This tagging of scrolls can be seen
as the predecessor of metadata.

A later director, Callimachus, sorted all the Greek writers on a large
set of tables (‘pinakes’), largely based on the categories set up by
Zenodotus. This resulted in tables for philosophers, orators, medical
writers, even one for ‘miscellaneous’ including cookbooks.
[^bodytext-02_12] The pinakes were more than just a list, as they
included metadata – the author’s name, the name of the author’s father,
the place of origin, and a statement about and a brief discussion of the
content of the scroll. Together, these lists created a metastructure
that we today might call a ‘database’. In both relational databases and
flat file databases, a core concept is precisely the notion of the
‘table’ – a set of data elements often organized by a two-dimensional
grid of columns and rows, a rhetorical and systemic atavism harking back
to Callimachus’ ‘tables’. Later directors, such as Eratosthenes and
Aristophanes, focussed more on science, geometry, and mathematics, and
elaborated upon Callimachus’ system of organizing the scrolls through
the creation of more tables, a greater pinakes; a more complete
database. It is the development of these categories based on preference
that reveals library organization to be a product of curation, and
subject to aesthetic decisions of preference and choice.

Scroll production was another issue. Many were produced by the resident
scholars. Another supply came from scrolls aboard ships that were
confiscated and copied. The originals were kept in the library, while
the owners received the copies. Older scrolls were preferred over
younger ones as they were seen as more ‘original’, meaning with fewer
errors than newer scrolls. The demand for these ‘original’ documents was
so high that Ptolemy III, the Pharaoh of Egypt and ruler of Alexandria,
deeply intent on acquiring the original Athenian scrolls of the plays of
Euripides, Sophocles, and Aeschylus, pulled off a trick. He offered the
rulers of Athens a rental agreement to have copies made at his expense.
Athens didn’t trust him, and replied that he had to insure the safe
return of the documents with fifteen talents of gold, today amounting to
about \$25,000,000. Ptolemy sent the gold, and the scrolls were shipped
to Alexandria where the scrolls were copied by the best scribes on the
highest quality papyrus. The copies were then shipped back – the
originals remaining in Alexandria! – and Athens was left with some
deluxe copies of their most precious scrolls and a lot of gold.
[^bodytext-02_13] The key point is clear: the library operated as
a copy centre. Making copies generated scholarship and brought vast
amounts of creativity and great power and wealth to the Ptolemy dynasty.

The Alexandria Library wasn’t merely some noble public deed with a lofty
goal and intent, it was also a way to empower, project, and extend the
grasp of the Ptolemaic kings. Their desire to increase their power over
scholarship as manifested in the Library of Alexandria, had an outcome
that was eventually suboptimal for the Ptolemaic system. The aggressive
acquisition practices reduced the resilience of the ancient
Mediterranean literary world as a whole. Once a book had been ‘captured’
it stayed in the Library, to be copied only for own use or when another
library was willing to finance the work and shipment.

If Alexandria had followed a less aggressive model of file acquisition,
and would have allowed opportunities for scrolls to be copied elsewhere
and more than once, a greater regional resilience would have been
created for a given book. [^bodytext-02_14] The artificially
maintained scarcity made scrolls of importance even more precious and
valuable. Consequently, other cities also started to develop collections
at great expense.

The greedy and vain Ptolemaic regime did not respond well to
competition. Feeling threatened by the libraries in Rhodes and Pergamum,
the Ptolemies banned the export of papyrus. This ill-considered move
came with what we might call a ‘blowback’. [^bodytext-02_15] In
this case, the blowback came from Pergamum. Faced with a collapse in
scholarship from the loss of papyrus, parchment was invented. Parchment
consists of animal skin that has been processed into a thin surface
optimal as a substrate for pen and ink. Parchment also allows for
moderate erasing; the skin can be shaved thinner to correct errors or
can be scraped overall to allow for reuse as a palimpsest – something
which is impossible with papyrus. Parchment is also much more durable
than papyrus. Humidity helps parchment stay pliable, while it rots
papyrus. Dryness hardens parchment, while dried out papyrus crumbles
easily. So, in trying to hinder competitors, the Ptolemy regime actually
spurred the development of parchment – a superior writing surface and
communication substrate that would eventually obviate and replace the
need for papyrus, not only the essential substrate of the Alexandria
library but also a valuable export item for the Egyptian economy.
[^bodytext-02_16]

Another significant problem with papyrus is its flammability. Stories of
the burning of Alexandria are well known up to this day. A fire of
another order was even more destructive however: languages changed.
Ancient Greek became incomprehensible to the scribes of the Christian
era, who spoke Coptic, Aramaic, Hebrew, Latin and demotic Greek. They
simply ignored these now unreadable scrolls and over the centuries the
papyrus crumbled to dust. Rome took over administration of the library
in 30 CE. Directorship of the library did not go to great scholars or
librarians, but was distributed as a gift of favoritism to
administrators, military leaders, and even athletes.
[^bodytext-02_17] By the time the famous Library of Alexandria
burned and was damaged beyond repair in 270 CE, it had already suffered
serious losses and centuries of bad administration.

What remains from Alexandria are its immaterial contributions to
culture, for these never burn – they can only be forgotten. One
contribution was the table, the analogue premonition of a database
element, the core feature in all computer databases today. What also
remained was the notion of knowledge curation and the development of an
epistemology enacted in the organization of books – which lives on until
today in the Dewey Decimal System and in metadata tagging. Also, the
basic tools of scholarship itself remained - the bibliography,
alphabetization, the commentary and the glossary, and most important for
our discussion; the idea of the library as a *locus of copying*.

### AFTER ALEXANDRIA 

At the time the Library of Alexandria started its downfall and burned,
several innovations transformed western libraries. One, as discussed
earlier, was the development of parchment and vellum made of animal
hides. Scrolls fell into disuse and were replaced by the codex: books
with pages. The codex made its way to Rome in the third century CE, and
greatly increased the ability of people to collect personal libraries.
It became considered *de rigueur* for a great villa or home to have its
own personal library, and there are descriptions of reading habits in
these villas going back to the late hours of the Western Roman Empire.
In a letter Sidonius Apollinarus writes (430 CE):

> ‘books in any number ready to hand; you might have imagined yourself
> at the shelves of a professional scholar or at the tiers in the
> Athenaeum or at the towering presses of booksellers. (...) manuscripts
> near the ladies’ seats were of a devotional type, while those near the
> gentlemen’s benches were works (...) of Latin eloquence (...) it was a
> frequent practice to read writers whose artistry was of a similar kind
> – here Augustine, there Varro, here Horace, there Prudentius.’
> [^bodytext-02_18]

In the fourth century, the city of Rome was largely abandoned, and with
its sacking in the fifth century, Western European scholarship suffered
a heavy blow as it was left to Christian monks to copy the books, first
and foremost the Bible, and battle the demon Titivillus in the
scriptoria of medieval monasteries. The church took a rather dim view of
pagan authors, and those volumes were left to rot or burned. Meanwhile,
societies in Asia and the Near East actually prized literature and
somewhat more independent thinking. The efforts of these societies would
result in the reintroduction of the ancient pagan works to a
Christianized Europe centuries later.

### ALEXANDRIA LIBRARY – PERSONAL PORTABLE LIBRARY 

The defects and strengths of the Alexandrian Library can be used as a
guide for the Personal Portable Library. Alexandria had many strengths:
its size, its range, its function as a copying device, its
‘shareability’ (albeit slow and hideously expensive), its library
science innovations, and the quality of its inventory. Some of the
defects are also instructive: its growth through appropriation, theft
and chicanery, its centralization, its error prone copying system, its
expense, and its existence as an institution which conferred power,
honour, and influence to its directorship and the local government.

The Personal Portable Library can and should appropriate and optimize
ideas inherent in the Alexandria Library. It can quite easily adopt and
wildly improve some of the strengths: size, range, the function as a
copying device, ‘shareability’, and the quality of inventory. To begin
with the size, the Library of Alexandria was about the same size as my
university’s library, and subject to the same analysis: the total data
size of the collection would be less than 3 TB and would fit on a drive
the size of a book and cost less than \$200. If each book were an EPUB
file of 1 MB in size, the storage need would be approximately 530 GB,
which would fit on a drive the size of a deck of cards and cost less
than \$80. While the cost of such a drive is completely out of reach for
billions of people on the planet (according to the World Bank
Development Indicators of 2008, about half the world, 3.5 billion
people, live on less than \$2.50 a day [^bodytext-02_19] ), for
many people in industrialized nations it’s not an insurmountable cost,
and for a good many people in the overdeveloped world, it’s a fairly
trivial price. Cost is a comparatively low hurdle. Moreover, the range
of the collection of a Personal Portable Library would easily exceed the
Library of Alexandria, as there are many fields of enquiry, study, and
art that have come into being since then.

In terms of resembling a copying machine, the Personal Portable Library
*only exists as a copy*. Digital data lacks origination, since it
*always already*exists in a state of reproduction. The Personal Portable
Library isn’t just a copy of the Library of Alexandria, but a kind of
amplified socio-political inversion of it, in that the Alexandrian
Library was a product of forced tribute to a central repository, while a
Personal Portable Library is a library that exists precisely to be
curated, copied and shared.

This is amplified by its shareability – as Personal Portable Libraries
are produced with common consumer ICT items, they naturally proliferate.
Documents are shared and copied at rates that exceed the Library of
Alexandria by many orders of magnitude. The rate only increases as
price/performance ratios intensify and speeds increase. The public in
its multitude can simply copy what it wants and share these copies,
amplifying the rate of copying. However, while these libraries are
copies of copies, they are not identical, as people will add or subtract
files, curating these drives in their interests.

The basic innovations of the Library of Alexandria are still used as
formal features of the database that is the operating system of the
computer and of the Personal Portable Library. At its root is the
Alexandrian alphabetization schematic, carried over into the Personal
Portable Library in the way that hard drives organize their file names.
On top of that lies the question of how users arrange and name
directories in their curation of the drive, just as the ancient
librarians of Alexandria curated their scrolls.

The defects of the Library of Alexandria – its growth through policed
appropriation and chicanery, its centralization, its error prone copying
system, and its expense –are transformed in the Personal Portable
Library. Theft and chicanery in the acquisition of scarce goods is
replaced with gifting and sharing in ubiquity and abundance (although
some prosecutors and institutions condemning file sharing and ‘piracy’
of course think differently). Centralization is replaced with radically
decentralized accumulation and sharing. There is no centre, no
organization, people simply think and act as positive contributors to a
larger and greater good in the spirit of free scholarship, which is part
and parcel of power dispersal and the positive empowerment of
multitudes. There is no ‘institution’ or center point – simply people
sharing files to the good and betterment of themselves and others,
towards a democratization of scholarship, knowledge production, and
information distribution.

## THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBRARY, MEDIEVAL TO MODERN 

The development of the printing press brought along the rise of the
modern library, and the political function of the library as an object
of political value and concern became much clearer. At the same time the
library came under the strictures of the proprietarian regime of
intellectual property and notions of copyright. The Library of
Alexandria was a kind of hybrid between a public and private library. It
wasn’t completely private and at the same time it wasn’t completely
public either. Many people used it every day, but only qualified people
could request to read scrolls and there was no direct access to the
‘stacks’ for anyone other than dedicated librarians. With the
abandonment, invasion, and sacking of Rome and its provinces, larger
libraries were found elsewhere in Asia. These were, by and large,
private libraries owned by aristocrats or, like Alexandria, semi-public
collections run by an aristocratic bureaucracy. As such they were also
subject to the whims of aristocratic ego and the vagaries of
bureaucratic administration.

In ancient and medieval China text was painted on vertical strips of
bamboo that were sewn together so they could be stacked like window
blinds, or text was painted onto sheets of silk. The first emperor of
the Qin dynasty Shi Huang ordered, for political reasons, the
destruction of thousands of these books, as well as the deaths of
hundreds of scholars, in order to break the Confucian bureaucracy and
establish his reign as the first of a new era. [^bodytext-02_20]
In this way, Shi Huang came to the same conclusion as the Ptolemies in
Egypt, namely, ‘that a monopoly on intellectual resources was as
important to rule as imperial control over the production of rice and
silk.’ [^bodytext-02_21]

The following dynasty, Han, placed great value on classical education,
yet books continued to disappear through theft, fire, and rot; the
common problems of a library. To promote durability at one point
Buddhist scholars carved the Sutras into stone, totalling 4.2 million
words. [^bodytext-02_22] Another development was the carving of
stone cylindrical stelae that allowed for paper rubbings to be made,
beginning in the third century CE. With the invention of paper in China,
it took little time to develop actual printing in the eleventh century,
and by the twelfth, Chinese paper money was being printed using copper
plates. Paper made its way to Europe and in the fifteenth century,
Gutenberg developed his moveable type press. The cylindrical drum press
was developed in 1843, mechanizing the process that had been
conceptually developed in China 1600 years earlier.

During the medieval period, Europe – compared to Asia – was a cultural
backwater. As noted above, China developed paper, printing, and a vast
legal and social bureaucracy. The zero was invented in India, and
algebra developed in the Middle East – developments made possible by the
research capacity fundamental to and enabled by the broadening and
funding of libraries, the copying and maintenance of the content, and
the intellectual climate this permitted. In China, stone stelae and wood
blocks were carved for printing important documents and classics, as
with Gutenberg’s developments of the press. The vast bulk of
documentation was still confined to hand lettered documents. Also
secondary research was handwritten and hand-copied, and libraries were
central to this process. For short documents handwriting was the rule
until the development of the typewriter in the 19th century, and stayed
the general habit of personal communication well into the 20th century.

These paper books felt and read differently than the animal hide codices
of the ancients. This new form of text was a product of an exacting
machined identicality, no longer a hand fashioned object of a team of
dedicated and highly trained artisans such as the parchment maker, the
scribe, and the bookbinder. It was now a product of a machine and
exhibited the uniformity of its provenance, the mechanized maw of
modernity itself.

Hundreds of libraries soon filled up with hundreds of thousands of
books. When a book fell into disrepair, it was simply replaced with
another copy or a newer edition. The order was sent out, and if the
publisher’s warehouse was nearby, it could arrive in a few days or weeks
and at fairly low costs. With the development of huge public libraries
such as the British Museum and the great university libraries of the
18th and 19th centuries, librarians developed library sciences in order
to deal with the torrent of books filling the shelves. With industrial
(over-)production and a collapse in prices for books, people started to
collect their own libraries. Personal libraries were no longer status
objects of the ruling class – they became available to a broad literate
professional class and even to some of the working class, who, with some
surplus wages and time, were gradually able to collect a shelf or two of
their favorite books.

To make this happen one more breakthrough was required, and that was the
development of pulp based paper. Until the development of pulp paper
mills, most paper was made from cotton, and prior to the development of
the cotton gin in the mid-19th century, cotton was not an easy substance
to acquire. Since clothing was still mostly homemade, there were few
scraps left over for papermaking. [^bodytext-02_23] The recycling
of cotton was a source of income for poor boys who would go from door to
door collecting old rags to sell them for a few pennies to the paper
mills. This is the source of the word ‘ragamuffin’.
[^bodytext-02_24]

The material ability to make paper out of wood pulp, which also meant
environmental destruction of industrial deforestation, permitted the
popularization of written texts – high speed printing systems won’t
function on something as delicate and expensive as parchment or silk.
Libraries, literacy, and access to printed material expanded
exponentially, while simultaneously dooming countless old growth forests
and their clima ecosystems. Instead of just a few hide-bound books of
hand-lettered parchment being kept in a small library owned by a wealthy
member of the ruling elite, suddenly there were millions of books,
magazines, journals, chapbooks, flyers, broadsheets, newspapers,
tabloids, reports, manifestos, novels, scripts, and used books
proliferating at low cost.

With this mechanization came several changes to the purpose and meaning
of the library. As a printing press was an expensive piece of gear,
investment costs in printing books was high. The result was the
development of copyright laws to protect the interests of capital and
its investment in production. Libraries ceased to be centers of copying
and became warehouses of information. Such a huge collection no longer
serves as an object of personal knowledge or as a locus of learning, as
much as it is a memory bank for that which in general is known.
Scholarship had been a process of linking and linkage, situated in the
library, where people ‘built upon’ pre-existing knowledge with new
experience or insights to create new knowledge, which was then put in
the library for the next generation to build upon. The function of a
library as a place for new linkages gave way to rote memorization. It
shifted from a locus learning and insight, to one of training, study,
and instruction. Its social meaning changed as well. Literacy was not
common in antiquity; the demand for knowledge was high, while the
production of books was low. Therefore, in antiquity the library
*equalled*learning. With the invention of the printing press however,
that role has been ceded to schools and universities, who have their own
libraries adjacent to the classroom experience. ‘The library’ then
became a warehouse of data and the kind of learning of the ancient
libraries shifted to personal libraries.

A small private library, outside or parallel to the academic or public
library, can make learning detailed and intimate – the owner knows the
books well and can easily find what he needs in them. As the libraries
grow, the intimacy with the collection as a whole gradually lessens.
Still, even as the number of books may go into the many hundred, they
are still of personal value and insight. For example, Charles Darwin’s
personal library amounted to 1,480 books in total, of which 730 copies
contain detailed research notes in their margins. These books are being
digitized at the Cambridge University Library, eventually allowing
scholars all over the world to access Darwin’s personal book collection.
Through studying Darwin’s library and his notes, scholars will be able
to delve into his ideas with greater appreciation. If Darwin had 100,000
books, such an intimate appreciation would be impossible.

### THE CASE OF WALTER BENJAMIN’S PERSONAL SEMI-PORTABLE LIBRARY 

A bulky predecessor of the Personal Portable Library was the portable
set of bookcases developed by Walter Benjamin. In his 1931 essay
‘Unpacking my Library’ [^bodytext-02_25] , he investigates a
number of perceptions and experiences in the development of his own
personal library. Loaded into a series of trunks or cases, Benjamin
always carried a core collection of literature with him to have at his
disposal. Benjamin reveals how he acquired precious books at auctions
and the tactics he used to win out over other more well-heeled
customers. He also talked about the kind of mania required in book
collectors, one that is based in anticipation and intense desire: ‘Every
passion borders on the chaotic, but the collector’s passion borders on
the chaos of memories. More than that: the chance, the fate, which
suffuse the past before my eyes are conspicuously present in the
accustomed confusion of these books.’ And, he noted: ‘For what else is
this collection but a disorder to which habit has accommodated itself to
such an extent that it can appear as order? You have all heard of people
whom the loss of their books has turned into invalids, or of those who
in order to acquire them became criminals.’ [^bodytext-02_26]

Benjamin, once one digs past his bragging rights at auction,
[^bodytext-02_27] makes some points that contribute to the
Personal Portable Library: ‘For inside him there are spirits, or at
least little genii, which have seen to it that for a collector – and I
mean a real collector, a collector as he ought to be – ownership is the
most intimate relationship that one can have to objects.’
[^bodytext-02_28] ‘And indeed, if there is a counterpart to the
confusion of a library, it is the order of its catalogue.’
[^bodytext-02_29] In the Personal Portable Library, the order of
the (card) catalogue is lost either through a recapitulation of
epistemological categories based on curatorial decisions or else made
redundant, dispensed with, except in the most rudimentary method of the
default alphabetization of documents by file name. The Personal Portable
Library has a bare bone architectural order built into it through the
fundamental, default order inherent to operating systems – systems
inherited from Alexandria.

Benjamin’s library was something of great personal and intimate value.
He wrote prior to the development of computer technology; these weren’t
files on a drive – data on a substrate – these were books made of paper
that had texture and smell and that existed as finite material objects,
in a sense, beings, that one encountered. Unlike a computer, they
permitted him immediate random access – he only had to go to the shelf,
pull a book out, open to a page, and begin reading. A computer system
requires one to start the computer, select a file and open it and then
search inside it, or start the computer and open an indexing software
and search on terms. There is very little that is random or
serendipitous to the computer’s file system.

As Benjamin remarks in the first quote, ‘ownership is the most intimate
relationship that one can have to objects’. This logically leads to
questions concerning property theory. What is intriguing is the
introduction of the personal – *ownership is the most intimate
relationship with objects*– as it touches on Hegel’s personality theory
of property, where property is seen as an expression of the personality.
Suffice it to say, Benjamin’s affect towards his library has some value
for the Personal Portable Library. Regardless whether the specific and
personal relationship that Benjamin had with each of the books in his
collection may or may not be possible in a Personal Portable Library
(with many tens of thousands of books), one can develop an affective
personal relationship to the Personal Portable Library itself as an
archive and be quite devoted to its continued existence and expansion.
In this way, there is affective similarity and difference in the
relation of ownership.

Objects are arranged in concentric circles of cathexis, where those
objects (people or things) most dear are central and the ones less dear
are peripheral. In this way, a distinction can be drawn between property
and possessions. The boundaries, necessarily permeable and imprecise,
can be distributed by vectors of affect, power, and bureaucracy. So, an
outer perimeter would be property as determined by bureaucracy. For
example, my wife and I own an acre of desert in New Mexico somewhere
outside of Albuquerque. Her father gave us the deed to this land. We own
it bureaucratically, and if someone usurped it, we would have recourse
to use state power to reclaim it through the judicial system. The level
of affect approaches nil. It’s a nice piece of, well, desert.
Conversely, there’s a photo of me and my daughter, Elizabeth, hanging on
my wall right here. That is a prized possession. I see it several times
a day, and it always brings me joy. I framed it myself in copperleaf.
The level of affect is high, the intrusion of state power approaches
nil, and the bureaucracy involved is effectively zero. This photograph
is in a closer circle on the plane of objects – to me this photo is much
more valuable than an acre of sand.

It is in this range that a Personal Portable Library exists. While one
may not have much affection for any given book, one may have a great
deal of affection for the library itself, especially as it embodies a
field of possibility and unknown delight, and, when properly indexed,
acts as a means of connection. It is this affection for a collection,
that touches on a sense of the sublime, that is unique to the Personal
Portable Library. For if knowledge is power, then access to knowledge is
access to power. This makes the Personal Portable Library access to a
great deal of power, especially when its contents match one’s interest
and design.

In hindsight, Benjamin’s enormous and unfinished *Arcades Project*was a
work that would have been completed very quickly if he had a Personal
Portable Library of indexed e-books. Searching, copying, pasting and
assembling the *Arcades Project*would have accelerated and completing
the task would have been much easier using Query Based Research
techniques in a Personal Portable Library. Benjamin’s entire library
could have fit on a \$10 USB stick.

* * * * *

[^bodytext-02_1]:  Information on patron saints is from Rosemary Ellen Guiley, *The
    Encyclopedia of Saints*, New York: Facts On File, Inc., 2001.

[^bodytext-02_2]:  Michelle Delio, ‘Patron Saint of the Nerds’, *Wired*, 4 October
    2011,
    [http://archive.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2004/11/65184](http://archive.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2004/11/65184).

[^bodytext-02_3]:  Mark Drogin, *Medieval Calligraphy: Its History and Technique*, New
    York: Dover, 1989. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_4]:  Sol Yurick. *Behold Metatron: The Recording Angel*, New York:
    Semiotext(e), 1983. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_5]:  Gustav Davidson, *A Dictionary of Angels, Including the Fallen
    Angels*, New York: Free Press, 1967, p.192. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_6]:  There are a number of different spellings: Qaballah, Kabbalah,
    Kabala or Cabala, depending on the spiritual tradtion’s norms, such
    as The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, or the Ordo Templis
    Orientis. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_7]:  Matt. 4:4: ‘But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not
    live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
    mouth of God.’ [↩]

[^bodytext-02_8]:  Michael Dumper and Bruce E. Stanley (eds) *Cities of the Middle East
    and North Africa: A Historical Encyclopedia*, Santa Barbara:
    ABC-CLIO, 2007. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_9]:  Matthew Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History*, New York: W.W.
    Norton, 2003, p. 26. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_10]: Casson, *Libraries in the Ancient World*, New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 2002, p. 36. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_11]: Casson, *Libraries in the Ancient World*, p. 37.

[^bodytext-02_12]: Casson, *Libraries in the Ancient World*, p. 40.

[^bodytext-02_13]: Casson, *Libraries in the Ancient World*, p. 35.

[^bodytext-02_14]: Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History*, p. 31. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_15]: Following Chalmers Johnson, *Blowback.The Costs and Consequences of
    American Empire*. Macmillan: 2001. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_16]: Johnson, *Blowback*, p. 29. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_17]: Johnson, *Blowback*, p. 47. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_18]: Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History*, p. 52. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_19]: World Bank, *Poverty and Inequality Database*,
    [http://data.worldbank.org/products/data-books/WDI-2008](http://data.worldbank.org/products/data-books/WDI-2008).

[^bodytext-02_20]: Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History*, pp. 34-38.

[^bodytext-02_21]: Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History*, p. 37. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_22]: Battles, *Library: An Unquiet History*, p. 40. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_23]: Derrick Jensen and Aric McBay, *What We Leave Behind*, New York:
    Seven Stories Press, 2009, p. 48. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_24]: Jensen and McBay, *What We Leave Behind*, p. 49.

[^bodytext-02_25]: Walter Benjamin, ‘Unpacking My Library’ in: *Illuminations*, New
    York: Schocken Books, 1968. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_26]: Benjamin, ‘Unpacking My Library’, p. 58. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_27]: Which are not insignificant – he really was able to sneak his way
    into some excellent deals through cleverness and manipulation and a
    little bit of luck. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_28]: Benjamin, ‘Unpacking My Library’, p. 67. [↩]

[^bodytext-02_29]: Benjamin, ‘Unpacking My Library’, p. 60. [↩]



# On/Off/Line 

> With books ready to be shared, meticulously catalogued, everyone is a
> librarian. When everyone is librarian, library is everywhere.
>
> Marcell Mars

> I can't tell if I'm a kingpin or a pauper\
>  Greedy little people in a sea of distress\
>  Keep your more to receive your less\
>  Unimpressed by material excess\
>  Love is free love me say hell yes\
>  Give it away, give it away, give it away NOW!
>
> Red Hot Chili Peppers, ‘Give it Away’

## ONLINE PRECARITY 

There was a time not that long ago when the internet was seen as the
fulfilment of a Deleuzian rhetoric of rhizomatics.
[^bodytext-03_1] In the 1990s, this description wasn’t that far
from the truth. It seemed that the internet was this indestructible
MilSpecs [^bodytext-03_2] network; impregnable to assault, a
final bastion of free speech and virtual community building. People
bragged for years about how file sharing was impossible to stop, given
internet topology: any clamp down would be met with a rhizomatic
resistance that would always overcome the stiff arboretics of
censorship.

This was proven wrong not long ago in Egypt, and continues to be
demonstrated in country after country as national governments and
corporations seek to limit, filter, record, and otherwise hinder free
traffic on the internet. With the 2011 rise against the regime of Hosni
Mubarak, the failure of the rhizomatic became clear through its victory.
As tensions escalated, people were using social media to organize
protests, circulate videos of government brutality and send a variety of
messages, opinions, and observations both to the internal and external
Egyptian mediasphere. For the Mubarak government this was out of
alignment with its interests, and it basically ‘pulled the plug’ on the
internet by shutting down the local Internet Service Providers (ISPs).
This had a number of effects, not all of them intended or desired by the
Mubarak regime.

First, there was the desired effect of most people in Egypt not being
able to access the internet. Second, there was the rhizomatic reaction:
people began looking for ways around the restrictions, for example by
accessing satellite phones. These phones had limited bandwidth, which
enabled digital transmission of images, text and short video clips.
However, most people did not have access to these systems, so, the vast
majority of internet users in Egypt were effectively denied access to
online resources that made the protests potent and possible. Third,
there was the secondary effect desired by the ruling elite, namely to
drive most people into more direct and unmediated forms of
communication. The Mubarak regime felt these would be slower and more
open to infiltration and therefore more desirable than digital
communication and the spontaneously organized networks that such
communication facilitated.

This, of course, was a complete miscalculation of the situation, as
there was the fourth and final reaction: the army turned away from
Mubarak and sided with the protestors when they realized that the
revolution against Mubarak could be won, and calculating that siding
with the revolution, they could easily dominate the resulting
government. As with many revolutions, revolution is resisted by the army
and won by the army. And that is exactly what transpired: the revolution
aiming for a new and greater democracy, run by a younger and more
secular population was stopped by the Egyptian Higher Military Council
with political allies in the Muslim Brotherhood. The removal of Mubarak
and a dozen of his associates was the first step in the Egyptian
military’s power play. The end result was no great change from the
Mubarak regime, as the head of the military council, General Tantawi,
has been the defense minister under Mubarak for over 25 years. Tantawi
was forced to resign by the new President of Egypt from the Muslim
Brotherhood. Tantawi’s successor is another long-term career officer,
Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. The military thus appropriates power to itself and
its political allies as it saw fit, and the political allies were
conversely able to affect the leadership of the military.
[^bodytext-03_3]^,^[^bodytext-03_4^] Elections were
permitted, which Mohamed Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood won. When Morsi’s
rule fell into disfavour, again, the military stepped in and deposed
him. At this writing, Egypt is still under military rule.

Another angle on that is provided by Andy Bichlbaum of The Yes Men when
he said in a recent interview in answer to the question why ‘we bother
with the real world if we all sit in front of our computers for the
majority of our lives anyway’:

> Because the real world is real, and the virtual world doesn’t really
> exist. Computers are only good for communicating simple information
> from one point to another, which is an improvement over the telephone,
> or town criers, or smoke signals. But the smoke signal has to
> reference something visceral. *In Egypt, Facebook was supposedly so
> important, but it was really useful only to tell everyone to go to
> Tahrir Square, and that only worked because everyone knew there was a
> reason to. Facebook didn’t give the reason; everyone knew why because
> of life.* [^bodytext-03_5]

The failure of the internet is demonstrated in 2013 with Edward
Snowden’s leaks, showing how the NSA simply eats the internet whole,
digests its contents as a database, and thus exerts control through a
hyper-panoptic dragnet of fear and assumed loss of privacy. Even though
the files from Snowden were provided over the internet, what they show
is that the NSA basically records and files the entire transmitted
digital infosphere – every single email, every single webpage, every
single phone call.

The perceived success of the web in Egypt compared to its actual
efficacy mirrors the kinds of claims made in the early ‘frontier’ days
of the internet [^bodytext-03_6] that the web was unstoppable and
uncontrollable. It is becoming very clear now, with the suppression of
data lockers, the closing of library.nu, the constant barrage of
restrictive legislation (SOPA, PIPA, ACTA, etc.), and the overwhelming
surveillance by the NSA that the web *is*stoppable, vulnerable, and
precarious. Indeed, the web has become so obviously precarious that
Julian Assange stated on SXSW in Austin Texas, 2014: ‘Now that the
internet has merged with human society… the laws that apply to the
internet apply to human society. This penetration of the internet by the
NSA and [British spy agency] GCHQ is the penetration of our human
society. It means there has been a militarisation of our civilian space.
A military occupation of our civilian space… is a very serious matter.’
[^bodytext-03_7] At the same event, Edward Snowden noted: ‘The
NSA, with this global mass surveillance that’s occurring in all
different countries, not just the U.S. – it’s important to remember that
this is a global issue – they’re setting fire to the future of the
internet.’ Snowden went on to exhort the audience to be ‘firefighters’.
[^bodytext-03_8] While some people enlist themselves as
‘firefighters’ others are simply moving the valuables out of the house
before it burns down.

Although rapid communication is impossible offline via Sneakernet, the
ability of people to exchange vast swaths of data in a secure manner is
amplified, as the Personal Portable Library concept shows. The material
is always more resilient than the virtual, and in a digital context, the
material consists of computer components, for the Personal Portable
Library: *the hard drive*. The exchanges of Personal Portable Libraries
are a direct response to the end of the internet. Following the collapse
of the electronic frontier into walled gardens and economic satrapies,
the foundation of radical responses should be advocated by some and
anticipated by all, and the Personal Portable Library is one of these
responses. There are a plethora of online technologies and websites that
intersect with the Personal Portable Library, and to even attempt to
list and discuss them all would be foolhardy. As examples, I’ll talk
about a few sites and resources that I have found most useful over the
years, and which will provide some historical context.

### NAPSTER 

An early and useful model was the one developed by Napster, which I had
the opportunity to work at for nine months – almost half of its
existence. I worked for Napster in two locations from April to November
2001. The first was a light blue warehouse in Redwood City that looked
to be some kind of a former truck repair space – the back wall was a
bank of huge garage doors, and the ceiling in the main room was at least
six meters tall. We were there until summer 2001 when we moved to a more
‘modern’ building in an office park in Redwood Shores. Neither building
was marked with the name Napster, and at the second office in Redwood
Shores, there was always a van in the parking lot with a mirrored window
that faced our building. Curtains were drawn as we were concerned about
eavesdropping and photography. By then, Sean Parker had long been banned
from the company – he had written an email saying something to the
effect that Napster was a great way to steal music, and this memo was
considered a smoking gun for the prosecution. Sean Fanning was a
friendly presence and could be counted on to do good work, at least
until the afternoon when his attention waned. Heck, he was 19 years old,
what do you expect?

The stress level was very high, and the level of mismanagement even
higher, which didn’t help at all. For example, prior to my being hired,
I was invited to the Napster Christmas party. The party planners had
rented a jazz club in San Francisco, Storyville, for the event. The two
Seans were not permitted in on their own Christmas Party. Why? Because
the law in San Francisco is very clear, no one under the age of 21 is
permitted in an establishment that serves alcohol, no exceptions. Who
plans a party in such a way that the principles in the company can’t
attend? Another example: in late 2000 Napster received funding from
Bertelsmann, who hoped to turn Napster into a ‘paid’ service. That was
one of the reasons I was hired – to do black box and grey box testing of
the billing client, which was going to route all Napster income through
Chase Bank. The dysfunctional thing with Bertelsmann funding Napster is
stunning: Bertelsmann’s music unit, BMG, was at the same time suing
Napster for millions of dollars. From a not unreasonable perspective the
whole thing stank of a scam. BMG sues Napster for millions of dollars
while Bertelsmann’s main company (BSE) puts millions into Napster. So,
if BMG wins, then BSE loses, and they write millions off for backing
Napster, while the BMG unit sees a massive profit for winning. If
Napster and BSE win, then BMG writes off their costs in prosecuting the
case (millions of dollars) and Napster and BSE make millions in profit
going forward. In effect, from this perspective, it seemed that this
dysfunctional mess of a company was acting as a kind of money mule in a
shell game for BSE and BMG. It was confusing and dispiriting.

Needless to say, as soon as the idea of a ‘paybox’ was put into
planning, many engineers were very upset, as in, *completely outraged*.
The dream of Napster was for everyone to freely share files to the
benefit of all. At one engineering meeting where this plan was
discussed, one of the programming engineers gave a loud and angry speech
about how Napster was betraying its most basic reason for being – the
free sharing of music in a P2P environment – and how this paybox idea
was evil and wrong. She stood there wagging her finger at management,
barking her disdain for their betrayal of the file sharing principles
she held so dear. It was a long and inspiring tirade, and when she
finished she slumped in her chair, burst into tears and then left the
meeting. I believe she resigned shortly thereafter. At one point the
arguing grew so heated that one afternoon two of the programmers got
into a shouting match that quickly escalated into a brutal fistfight,
and they both had to be physically restrained from beating the crap out
of each other. The police weren’t called. The two troublemakers were
told to go home and cool off. For a time, emotional meltdowns and
shouting matches became a frequent occurrence, and then a sense of quiet
desperation took hold. When things were finally coming to a head in late
2001, a couple of people attempted suicide out of utter despair.

Still, every morning we had a free breakfast of bagels and spreads,
fruits, and coffee...

One can criticize the engineers for their naivety. After all, they were
working for a multi-million dollar corporation – what were they
thinking? That somehow Napster, a company propped up by the parent
corporation of one of the very companies suing them for millions of
dollars, was going to operate outside the laws of capitalist extraction?
Such was the depth of the delusional California Ideology, a weird
pseudo-anarchism of technological commodity fetishism and libertarian
idealism so common in Silicon Valley at the time – an ideology with its
own propaganda organ in the form of *Wired*magazine. The architecture of
P2P fed directly into this – which allowed things to be freely shared
between developers (as in the Free or Open Source Software movement) and
between users as well. At the same time cracking open the final
recalcitrant shell of the proprietarian regime, and still being
completely beholden to the mechanical substrate of computer systems,
devices made by and for corporations whose interests lay in quarterly
profit statements.

The saddest part of this entire episode is that the idealism wasn’t
entirely misplaced: P2P *does*strike out at the very notion of
intellectual property as it had come to be. It *does*permit users to
exchange any kind of digital file. It *is*coherent with the fundamental
architecture of the computer: copying data from one memory register to
another. Unfortunately, due to the exigencies of the proprietarian
regime’s stranglehold on IP that undergirds nearly feudalist
[^bodytext-03_9] socio-economic arrangements, unremitting and
often brutal applications of intellectual property ideologies have been
imposed in order to maintain the social, political, and economic
dominance of this unbalanced class structure.

In September 2001, Napster lost the case. In November there were massive
layoffs. When we came in that day, we all had to line up and, in turn,
sit with a rep from Human Resources [^bodytext-03_10] who had us
sign our ‘go away’ papers, shook our hand, and ordered us out of the
building. Although I was not happy about that, I was not surprised. Very
simply put, Napster was one of the worst work environments I’ve ever had
the displeasure to collect a check from. While it wasn’t as bad as some
other day jobs I’ve had from the planet of bad day jobs, it certainly
was in a close orbit. Still, I made many friends there, forged in that
pit of dysfunction and adversity, and I am proud to have served with
them. We fought the good fight – *we lost*. Napster was an early effort
in public file sharing. The structure of P2P evolved and moved to other
systems (Limewire, Kazaa, etc.) and its structure, as discussed earlier,
stands in stark difference to the data lockers and torrent systems that
followed.

### LIBRARY.NU 

In the early 2000s there was a website called ebooksclub.org which
evolved into gigapedia.com, a massive online library. Over time it grew
and shifted the structure of its operation, changing its name to
library.nu. The files on library.nu were stored on a data locker,
ifile.it. Ifile.it paid for its hosting bills using advertising. Soon,
library.nu was the largest repository of freely downloadable e-books in
the world, with some half million titles – very similar in size to the
Library of Alexandria.

This remarkable resource for humanity was removed from history by
publishers of extortionately expensive textbooks. In 2011, investigators
hired by book publishers found that the names of those responsible for
library.nu were the same as those linked to ifile.it. In the publisher’s
view, this made them accountable for the profits derived from the
advertising revenues; they maintained that library.nu was basically the
front end for ifile.it’s advertising business model, and that the fact
that the same people ran both was sufficient proof.

Christopher Kelty wrote about the erasure of library.nu, noting that
these weren’t

> just any books – not romance novels or the latest best-sellers – but
> scholarly books: textbooks, secondary treatises, obscure monographs,
> biographical analyses, technical manuals, collections of cutting-edge
> research in engineering, mathematics, biology, social science and
> humanities. The texts ranged from so-called ‘orphan works’
> (out-of-print, but still copyrighted) to recent issues; from poorly
> scanned to expertly ripped; from English to German to French to
> Spanish to Russian, with the occasional Japanese or Chinese text. It
> was a remarkable effort of collective connoisseurship.
> [^bodytext-03_11]

The results of the loss were predictable, and telling:

> To the publishing industry, this event (the closing of library.nu) was
> a victory in the campaign to bring the unruly internet under some
> much-needed discipline. To many other people – namely the users of the
> site – it was met with anger, sadness and fatalism. But who were these
> sad criminals, these barbarians at the gates ready to bring our
> information economy to its knees? They are students and scholars, from
> every corner of the planet. [^bodytext-03_12]

With the erasure of library.nu, the precarity of the online became
transparent: it is painfully obvious that online projects that provide
knowledge are subject to the whims of lawyers acting in the interests of
proprietarian regimes.

### AAAAARG.ORG 

Aaaaarg.org was developed as arg.org some ten years ago as a way for the
artist Sean Dockray and his friends to share and exchange ideas about a
text. For everyone to read and comment on the text, it had to be shared.
This is comparable to a local book club or literature discussion group,
where people share books for the purpose of sharing ideas and
observations.

Over time, as Dockray has noted [^bodytext-03_13] , the focus of
aaaaarg.org shifted from a small group of people sharing ideas about a
few books, to thousands of people uploading and downloading a
non-trivial archive of e-books, articles, and journals. The structure of
aaaaarg.org is very much that of a data locker. People can upload and
download materials from its server without charge, leaving it vulnerable
to proprietarian actions. In 2009, the publisher of leftist books Verso,
asked aaaaarg.org to remove all Verso books, per the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA). Aaaaarg.org complied. The results were less than
optimal for Verso. People soon re-uploaded the books from Verso, and a
disgruntled user set up a blog called fckvrso.wordpress.com, with links
to books by Verso in other data lockers. This was an unfortunate fracas,
not in the least because Verso’s publications are of a left wing nature,
featuring books by Žižek, Agamben, Lukacs and Althusser, among others.
This episode also serves to point at the central contradiction the
Personal Portable Library brings to the fore: that of intellectual or
imaginary property in a capitalist system of digital data which depends
on the copying of data for its most fundamental operation. Recently
aaaaarg.org changed its UI design and its membership structure. Now,
instead of applying to aaaaarg.org for membership, it is by invitation
by other members. This decentralizes the membership and creates
genealogies of relation between older members and newly invited members.
All uploading activity is now part of an ongoing list of actions one can
scroll back. So, while it doesn’t have the mechanical usefulness of a
daily statement of uploaded material, it does invite one to examine what
has been uploaded in a more thoughtful manner. Should aaaaarg.org ever
be shut down, it could, theoretically, be revivified as another site by
one of those Personal Portable Librarians who meticulously monitor its
acquisitions. Despite its size, aaaaarg.org’s entire contents fit on a
handful of USB keys or an inexpensive hard drive.

### ARCHIVE.ORG 

Housed in a beautiful building, a former Christian Science Church in San
Francisco, archive.org is a treasure trove of over ten petabytes (PB) of
information. It has been recording parts of the internet for years and
is accessible via the ‘Wayback Machine’, which allows one to visit a
website as it was on various moments in history. As a library, it runs
an active and ongoing book scanning and Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) program, with over 1 million books available for download.
Archive.org is very attentive to claims of copyright – due to its 10 PB
size it can’t really afford to tweak the properitarian powers that be.
Despite these limitations, the depth and breadth of archive.org is
stunning and far beyond the capacity of any Personal Portable Library,
as it occupies banks of servers. Archive.org is also an active and much
needed activist advocate for a free and open internet and for Access to
Knowledge.

### GUTENBERG PROJECT 

As discussed earlier, the Gutenberg Project, founded in 1971, is the
oldest online library. It is scrupulously fixed on only providing works
that are available in the public domain. As a consequence, it only has
about 42,000 books, making Gutenberg about the same size as aaaaarg.org.
Downloading the entire Gutenberg library would be a tedious yet
worthwhile activity and a valuable resource for any library.

### AVAXHO.ME 

Avax is a shadowy organisation based in Russia. Links to any kind of
digital object can be found there – software, videos, music, books. The
Avax site is a kind of centralized, all-in-one mimic of the blog with
data locker structure. In many file sharing scenarios, people set up
interest blogs with links to files in data lockers elsewhere. Avax
centralizes all this, by allowing users to create file sharing blogs
inside the Avax structure. These ‘blogs’ link out to data lockers,
hence, Avax merely provides a space for people to link to files. Avax
also has its own search engine, avaxsearch.net, so finding material on
Avax is easy. That said, Avax is completely dependent on the rhizomatic
nature of the internet and on the associated data lockers, and for that
reason is vulnerable. When Megaupload and ifile.it were taken out by the
proprietarian regime, Avax lost a lot of its linked content. All that
was left was a network of blogs with dead links. In the past few years
it has rebuilt its content, and is now big as ever. Avax monetizes its
size with advertising in the blogs that link to the files.

### LIBGEN 

Libgen is a massive online (book) library. Libgen, short for Library
Genesis, is also based in Russia, and is even more shadowy than Avax. It
was briefly offline in 2011, but soon returned bigger than ever. At the
time it had about 800,000 books. It now has well over a million volumes
and occupies approximately twelve terabytes of storage. Many e-books in
libgen are not optimized – hundreds of them are well over 100 MB in
size. For example, *Middle Egyptian: An Introduction to the Language and
Culture of Hieroglyphs*by James P. Allen weighs in at over 107 MB and is
not even downloadable via their web portal. Then how to acquire this
book? Well, either by downloading the entire 9 TB libgen.info library
which is available via torrents (linked in the Tor network), or finding
someone who has already done that, so as to acquire it from them. Libgen
is a kind of hybrid that is too big to be a convenient Personal Portable
Library and so by definition, like archive.org, is an online entity. Yet
its survival is predicated on an offline strategy. People have developed
their own online libraries on the ground provided by libgen. An example
is bookfi.org, based on the original Library Genesis data set, and grown
in a different direction. In February 2013, libgen branched out into
libgen.org. This has the entire libgen library, and allows people to add
books. My research indicates that, around mid-2013, it had an upload
rate of approximately 100-150 items per day.

### OTHERS 

Online e-book libraries come and go – new ones appear all the time. This
is in keeping with the underlying structures of online systems combined
with the power and depth of offline systems. It’s not possible to
provide a comprehensive list, on the other hand, all one needs do is
search on Google for free downloadable books. Online file sharing
systems – whether they be front ends for data lockers such as library.nu
or precious narrowcast collections like aaaaarg.org – are always in the
cross hairs of proprietarian legal action and must constantly adjust
their strategy and tactics for staying online. Claims of rhizomatic
strength mask the actual precarity of the individuals operating these
systems. This precarity is amply balanced by offline file sharing
systems.

## OFFLINE APPROACHES 

Methods of offline file sharing often spring from the realm of fine art.
Some art projects take the concept of file sharing as their start or end
point and I will discuss some of them below. Fine art objects are
localized and limited – they are on display for a fixed amount of time
as part of an exhibition and are seen as a materialization of free
speech. In this way the projects have only a temporary or limited
impact, and by the time someone notices the work it is gone, the exhibit
closed up and disassembled. Also, since practicality isn’t a central
feature of art, the works exist in a pretensive space, where they
operate under an ‘as if’ condition. Some of these projects aren’t
practical at all, and function more like gestures.

### THE DEAD DROPS PROJECT 

Dead Drops was created by the Berlin artist Aram Bartholl, while being
artist in residence at the New York art space EYEBEAM in October 2010.
It consists of putting USB sticks – Dead Drops – in public places, often
cemented into cracks in the wall or between bricks.

The advantages of Dead Drops are clear – they require no commitment,
they are easily accessible in public spaces, extremely inexpensive and
quick to set up, and they are inherently local, require no significant
computer skills, and serve local parochial needs and interests. Also,
all is very private – no record is made on the Dead Drop of who visited
it and what they left or what they took. In this way, the system is
completely anonymous, with all the strengths and pitfalls that
engenders. Also, Dead Drops is sensitive to weather and viruses. A good
rainstorm ruins the USB stick, and one person with one infected machine
can render the network dangerous. Still, Dead Drops was a unique and
vital gesture in offline file sharing as it encouraged participation.

### THE PIRATEBOX SYSTEM 

The PirateBox, originally called Freedrop, [^bodytext-03_14] is a
creative gesture by David Darts, an art professor at New York
University. He built it to fill a need for himself and found that others
could use it also. He posted the instructions on how to build it on a
wiki page. [^bodytext-03_15] The first one he made is a metal
lunch box, painted black with a white skull-and-crossbones. Inside a
microserver is mounted running the Linux (Debian distro) operating
system, and on top of that is a barebones Python-powered web server and
Wi-Fi router. The device creates an open file sharing network in any
public space. [^bodytext-03_16]

Darts describes the PirateBox as a device

> designed to facilitate sharing which, by definition, is the opposite
> of stealing. The misleading connection between stealing and sharing
> has been promulgated by old media interests and their well funded
> lobby groups who claim that sharing and remixing copyrighted materials
> hurts artists… Today it is not productive to restrict sharing in order
> to pay for centralized production and distribution. Prohibiting people
> from freely sharing and remixing information and culture serves no
> one’s interests but the publishers. [^bodytext-03_17]

The PirateBox creates a temporary space for file sharing, a temporary
community in a virtualized space, overlaid on a real public space. The
social space that the PirateBox creates can be seen as a kind of
network-generating object, where the social doesn’t really exist until
the technology that creates such an affordance of relation is connected.
Darts decries the centralization of media and sees the PirateBox as a
‘symbolic response to this centralized control’.

The Pirate Box is a significantly useful tool as it can be easily scaled
in size, and act as an ad hoc locus of knowledge dissemination and
distribution. An application of Pirate Box could be as follows. Someone
walks into a café, announcing ‘Pirate Box has arrived. This is an open
network. Share its contents. Add things at your will.’ The denizens of
the cafe would take note, and share as they see fit, or not. If this is
repeated, consistently, then people will know they can pick up
interesting books and media at the cafe. If repeated in enough places,
it would reframe our experience of knowledge acquisition and help reform
our notion of property, as these are things shared, not owned. With a
Personal Portable Library attached to such, anyone could become a
travelling library, as scaling a Pirate Box from a small USB stick to a

terabyte drive is a trivial effort. This would change the Pirate Box
from a small number of files to a huge Datafield. Indeed, my own
creative activity in developing DATAFIELD was inspired by Pirate Box.

### COPY THIS DRIVE 

In the installation Copy this Drive (2011) digital artist Nick Briz left
the content of his hard disk available to the public. The installation
was composed of an Apple CRT monitor made of transparent plastic,
mounted on a plexiglas column which housed an Apple computer that
contained the artist’s hard drive. The artist permitted anyone to
connect to the computer via a USB cable and copy any file they desired
or even clone the whole computer drive. This gesture of generosity and
vulnerability showed in a great manner that the contents of a drive and
its curation are personal belongings that can be shared – they are
something other than property.

### DEADSWAP 

Developed by Berlin based Dmytri Kleiner, the best description of
deadSwap is from the deadSwap website itself:

> deadSwap is an offline file sharing system where participants covertly
> pass a USB stick from one to another. The route of the USB memory
> stick and the identity of the other participants is not known by the
> users but controlled by local, independently operated SMS gateways
> that are kept as a carefully shared secret by their users [...]
> deadSwap is a social experiment exploring the possibilities of
> creating an entirely off-line file-sharing and communications platform
> where people pass a USB memory stick from one to another. The
> coordination of the passing-on of the stick is done through an
> anonymous SMS gateway, meaning that the system does not require
> Internet availability and also that, with certain precautions, it can
> be a very private system that is quite difficult to monitor.
> [^bodytext-03_18]

This kind of technology is extremely valuable for strangers to be able
to share data on offline devices. It could be as small as a USB key, or
as large as a station wagon filled with terabyte hard drives. This is an
example of a potentially very practical interface for offline file
sharing, creating connectivity and clandestine community building (or,
as clandestine as the NSA permits). As of this writing deadSwap is
offline. That may change, but the instance highlights the precarity of
online systems.

### DATAFIELD 

Datafield is an installation I put together for the ‘Dark Side of the
Digital’ Conference in Milwaukee, Wisconsin in May 2013. I took a few of
the technologies discussed above and amalgamated them together.
Essentially, Datafield is a Wi-Fi router attached to a terabyte hard
drive that contained the 45,000 books from the Alexandria Project.
Instructions were provided on how to sign in to the drive and how to
find, download or upload files. It was a small and tightly scheduled
conference, yet ten files were left behind by users, and dozens more
were downloaded. Unlike the PirateBox, which requires some knowledge of
Linux and computer building, all of the equipment for Datafield came off
the home entertainment / media server technology department. It showed
that using common consumer technology (a Cisco Router and a Western
Digital hard drive) works for the strategies of offline file sharing .
This kind of technology could be easily extended to any public place of
learning – universities, schools, libraries, cafes, parks...

### MARCELL MARS 

Marcell Mars is doing a great deal of research in the field of on- and
offline libraries. An artist and a technologist, he runs workshops like
*Programming for non-programmers*and *Social software and semantic web
in practice*. As an artist, I resonate with his approach and practice –
like me, he is many. He has developed a remarkable plug-in for Calibre
that allows one to trade books directly with others. For these efforts
he has been banned from the Calibre conversation. He is actively engaged
in open source systems that already exist, manipulating them to
synergize new, more powerful library systems. He will be someone whose
efforts I will track as the Personal Portable Library grows and becomes
less personal and more library. I suggest you do the same.
[^bodytext-03_19]

These are a few of the projects around at the time of this writing. They
point at a bright future for public file sharing reflected in a broad
dissemination of knowledge and an enhanced circle of learning. But the
realization of all these promises depends on what *we*make of the
future.

* * * * *

[^bodytext-03_1]:  As a model for culture, the rhizome resists the organizational
    structure of the root-tree system which charts causality along
    chronological lines and looks for the original source of ‘things’
    and looks towards the pinnacle or conclusion of those ‘things’. A
    rhizome, on the other hand, is characterized by ‘ceaselessly
    established connections between semiotic chains, organizations of
    power, and circumstances relative to the arts, sciences, and social
    struggles.’ Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, *A Thousand Plateaus:
    Capitalism and Schizophrenia*, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
    1987, p. 7. [↩]

[^bodytext-03_2]:  ‘A United States defense standard, often called a military standard,
    “MIL-STD”, “MIL-SPEC”, or (informally) “MilSpecs”, is used to help
    achieve standardization objectives by the U.S. Department of
    Defense.’ Wikipedia, United States Military Standard.

[^bodytext-03_3]:  Hani Fakhouri, ‘Arab Spring Revolution and Rise of Religious
    Sectarianism’, Mid East Today, 12 April 2012,

    [http://mid-east-today.blogspot.ca/2012/04/arab-spring-revolution-and-rise-of.html](http://mid-east-today.blogspot.ca/2012/04/arab-spring-revolution-and-rise-of.html).

[^bodytext-03_4]:  Recent upset in Egypt only serves to underscore these points: The
    military made a deal with the Muslim Brotherhood, but when the
    leader, Morsi, proved suboptimal and millions turned out to protest
    his reign, the military stepped in and Morsi was deposed. What this
    shows is not the power of the internet in Egypt but the power of the
    military. [↩]

[^bodytext-03_5]:  Laura Gottesdiener, ‘“Why Do Oppressed People Have such Great
    Jokes?” The Yes Men’s Andy Bichlbaum’, *Waging Non Violence*, 23
    April 2012,
    [http://wagingnonviolence.org/2012/04/why-do-oppressed-people-have-such-great-jokes-the-yes-mens-andy-bichlbaum/](http://wagingnonviolence.org/2012/04/why-do-oppressed-people-have-such-great-jokes-the-yes-mens-andy-bichlbaum/).
    Emphasis added. [↩]

[^bodytext-03_6]:  The geographic metaphor of the internet as frontier is one I hope to
    explore in a future volume. It was explored by Beth Scannell in her
    master’s thesis *Life on the Border: Cyberspace and the Frontier in
    Historical Perspective*
    ([http://www.kether.com/words/thesis/index.html](http://www.kether.com/words/thesis/index.html))
    and deserves greater development now that the frontier is closed and
    the enclosure process has begun.[↩]

[^bodytext-03_7]:  Stuart Dredge, ‘Julian Assange Tells SXSW Audience: “NSA has grown
    to be a rogue agency”’, *The Guardian,*8 March 2014,
    [http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/08/julian-assange-wikileaks-nsa-sxsw](http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/08/julian-assange-wikileaks-nsa-sxsw).

[^bodytext-03_8]:  Cory Doctorow, ‘Edward Snowden: “The NSA Set Fire to the Internet.
    You Are the Firefighters”’, *The Guardian*, 11 March 2014,
    [http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/11/edward-snowden-sxsw-nsa-internet](http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/11/edward-snowden-sxsw-nsa-internet).

[^bodytext-03_9]:  For more on informational feudalism, I recommend Drahos and
    Braithwaite’s *Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Information
    Economy?*New York: The New Press, 2002. [↩]

[^bodytext-03_10]: Human Resources is a notion I find repellent in its dehumanizing
    transduction of people with hopes and dreams into mere ‘resources’
    like glass, steel, and concrete. At least the term ‘Personnel’ has
    the word ‘Person’ in it. [↩]

[^bodytext-03_11]: Christopher Kelty, ‘The Disappearing Virtual Library’, *Al Jazeera*,
    1 March 2012,
    [http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/02/2012227143813304790.html](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/02/2012227143813304790.html).

[^bodytext-03_12]: Kelty,‘The Disappearing Virtual Library’. [↩]

[^bodytext-03_13]: ‘It was pretty simple at the beginning – sharing things with people
    who I was working with or in contact with. The community originally
    was tiny. The ways that people have since figured out how to use it
    are very personal to them, or are communal, forming relationship
    with others through the site. I like that people pass it on like
    it’s a gift. But as for an understanding of where it would go, I had
    no idea it would become so big and active in the way it is now. I
    didn’t expect 20,000 people to participate. Its growth has been
    exponential since early summer: 80% of what’s there has been
    contributed in the last six months or so.’ Morgan Currie, ‘Small is
    Beautiful, Interview with Sean Dockray’, *Masters of Media blog*, 5
    January 2010,
    [http://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/2010/01/05/small-is-beautiful-a-discussion-with-aaaarg-architect-sean-dockray/](http://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/2010/01/05/small-is-beautiful-a-discussion-with-aaaarg-architect-sean-dockray/).

[^bodytext-03_14]: Jacob Aron, ‘PirateBox Lets You Share Files with Anyone Close by’,
    *New Scientist*, 28 January 2011,
    [http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2011/01/piratebox.html](http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2011/01/piratebox.html).

[^bodytext-03_15]: David Darts, ‘David Darts: Pirate Box DIY Page’,
    [http://wiki.daviddarts.com/PirateBox\_DIY](http://wiki.daviddarts.com/PirateBox_DIY).

[^bodytext-03_16]: ‘Inside the PirateBox sits a Free Agent Dockstar, an Asus WL330GE
    wireless router, and a SanDisk 16GB flash drive. The software,
    including Debian Linux and the DD-WRT open-source router firmware,
    is all free. The total build cost is under \$100, not counting the
    lunchbox enclosure and the optional battery pack (the PirateBox can
    alternately run on AC power).’ From: Nate Anderson, ‘PirateBox: An
    Artistic Provocation in Lunchbox Form’, *Ars Technica*, 30 January
    2011,
    [http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/01/piratebox-an-artistic-provocation-in-lunchbox-form.ars](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/01/piratebox-an-artistic-provocation-in-lunchbox-form.ars).

[^bodytext-03_17]: See, ‘David Darts: Pirate Box DIY page’,
    [http://wiki.daviddarts.com/PirateBox\_DIY](http://wiki.daviddarts.com/PirateBox_DIY).

[^bodytext-03_18]: See,
    [http://deaddrops.com/deadswap/](http://deaddrops.com/deadswap/).

[^bodytext-03_19]: See, [http://gle.ovo.kom.uni.st/](http://gle.ovo.kom.uni.st/).



# Futures and Potentials 

> Books bombarded his shoulders, his arms, his upturned face. A book
> alighted, almost obediently, like a white pigeon, in his hands, wings
> fluttering. In the dim, wavering light, a page hung open and it was
> like a snowy feather, the words delicately painted thereon. In all the
> rush and fervour, Montag had only an instant to read a line, but it
> blazed in his mind for the next minute as if stamped there with fiery
> steel. ‘Time has fallen asleep in the afternoon sunshine.’
>
> Ray Bradbury, Fahrenheit 451

The Personal Portable Library is a practical reality, and it is not only
so in the province of file sharing communities and other fringe actors.
Mainstream scientists are now discovering the power of the offline as
they work to preserve their research in the face of government
oppression, even in a ‘Western democracy’ like Canada. There are various
scenarios for the future of offline library systems, largely dependent
on issues of property claims of copyright and strategic technology
decisions by both proprietarian forces and resistance. What follows are
some scenarios from the best possible outcomes to other options.

## OPTIMAL SCENARIOS 

The most optimal scenario would be for the publishing industries to
admit they are wrong and go away. Given present political circumstances
and the economics involved, the odds of that happening range somewhere
between infinitesimal and none. So we should view the set of scenarios
that enhance the possibilities and usefulness of the Personal Portable
Library in the face of the opposition from said industries and forces.

If a clever programmer out there decided to merge a search engine into
Calibre, either directly or as a plug-in, basically all other e-book
management systems would instantly pale in comparison, especially if
Calibre were as transportable as Dropout. As it is Calibre works on all
the major platforms (Mac, Windows and Linux) so all that’s missing is
the ability to index the contents of the e-books, something handily done
by Dropout’s Lucene search engine. With Calibre’s organization and
metadata capabilities combined with a search engine, Query Based
Research could mature into something extremely powerful. There is talk
to build such a plug-in on the Calibre site. For now, there are
alternatives like using Calibre to organize files and then using Dropout
or similar software to index the collection.

Query Based Research, still in its infancy, would permit the application
of a variety of computer based practices to text in a way that is only
being hinted at with systems like Google Scholar. While Google Scholar
has access to a huge variety of texts, the inability to process these
texts seriously limits its use value as a research composition tool.
Calibre with search would be profoundly powerful – you could have your
own ‘Google Scholar’ of a focused set of texts on your own computer,
with copyable content.

With the offline sharing of Personal Portable Libraries, people in the
developing world would only need inexpensive computers to access and
process enormous amounts of information. One properly curated Personal
Portable Library could easily turn a small poor school into a centre of
research. Certainly a 12 TB sized system, if indexed, would be profound
and powerful, as it would rival the libraries of all but the largest
cities or institutions. An interesting development is that one libgen
variant now has a search function. However, due to its size and
bandwidth considerations, the system is slow and unwieldy, and its
search parameters are loose. To make it compelling (and a lot faster)
would require localizing it onto a hard drive.

Students would be able to access books that aren’t available in their
library or even country. Through local, informal networks of libraries,
people work together and share information in a positive commons of
knowledge. In a sufficiently progressive environment, a public library
could simply be an amplified version of Datafield – where people can
freely access documents via localized offline Wi-Fi networks or
meshnets. There are some hybrid projects: digital distribution systems
with proprietarian oversight. San Antonio, Texas, has an example of
this, where a digital library has been set up and patrons access books
on-site. As noted in the Wall Street Journal:

> The trial location, opening in a satellite government office on San
> Antonio's south side in the fall, will have a selection of about
> 10,000 titles, and 150 e-readers for patrons to check out, including
> 50 designed for children. The library will allow users to access books
> remotely, and will feature 25 laptops and 25 tablets for use on site,
> as well as 50 desktop computers. It will also have its own coffee
> house. [^bodytext-04_1]

With 5 MB PDFs, the entire library collection could fit on a 64 GB USB
stick. If they are EPUB or text files, the entire library would fit on
an even smaller substrate, perhaps as small as a 16 GB USB stick. This
public library scenario is hamstrung by proprietarian regimes of
copyright and actually rather trivial compared to a system like
Datafield or the PirateBox, and microscopic compared to online systems.

## SUBOPTIMAL SCENARIOS 

Suboptimal scenarios are scenarios that threaten the possibility of
Personal Portable Libraries. There are many suboptimal scenarios, so we
shall examine them more by strategy than tactic. Broadly, there are a
few approaches: legalistic, strategic or social, and technological –
manipulating how people use technology, which comes laden with ideology.

The legalist approach is a familiar one: capture career politicians to
make increasingly draconian laws with ever more brutal punishments for
file sharing. As noted earlier, if SOPA had been passed, one could spend
more time in jail for sharing a Michael Jackson song than the doctor who
killed him. The intensity and brutality of this approach has harmed the
lives of many. It was, per his loved ones and family, a factor in the
suicide of Aaron Swartz. [^bodytext-04_2] This draconian
approach has not been particularly effective at stopping file sharing
[^bodytext-04_3] , nor has it done much good for the image of
the proprietarian corporations as it has created its own nemesis in the
Pirate Party and similar organisations. For that reason, while the
legalistic approach is a consistent pressure, it has become a secondary
strategy compared to the social and technology-based strategies.

There have been a number of computer-based approaches. In 2001, Western
Digital developed hard drive software that would ‘phone home’ reporting
on its use. This was met with derision by users, and was abandoned.
There is no reason why similar devices would not again have such malware
installed. The use value for companies would be to know what files
people use, so as to be able to market to them more accurately. The flow
of this data would, of course, be captured by the NSA, and given the
complicity between the U.S. Government and proprietarian copyright
advocates, the idea that it might be known what is on one’s drive would
be disheartening to say the least.

Previously, companies have proposed various Digital Rights Management
(DRM) systems. Even though all of them have largely failed, this hasn’t
stopped them trotting out new schemes. These draconian tactics are
counterproductive. A much more strategic approach in hardware has been
to obviate the need for hard drives by emphasizing the use of cloud
storage and marketing devices that don’t readily connect to external
drives. The emphasis on cloud storage is clear and obvious – for some
time Microsoft was giving away 25 gigabytes of online cloud storage –
everyone could have a personal data locker in the sky. Even scaled back,
the efforts of Microsoft, Apple, and Dropbox are not to be
underestimated. Once cloud storage is so cheap that it is essentially
free, and bandwidth is unlimited, the short-term value proposition of
offline file storage seemingly diminishes against the convenience and
low costs associated with streaming media and cloud storage. However,
these systems, as discussed earlier, are precarious and dependent. If
you have a library in the cloud, and the cloud company goes out of
business, your files could disappear instantly. If you depend on
streaming technology, and your stream source disappears, you are left
with nothing. An offline storage system – a Personal Portable Library –
is resilient against the vagaries of the marketplace and the whims of
political censorship and control.

The strategy of streaming and online dependence is enabled and
emphasized by the marketing of tablet based computing and the rise of
streaming audio companies. Tablets have no need to connect to external
hard drives – they are increasingly aligned with cloud computing data
lockers. As discussed earlier, every data locker has a gatekeeping
mechanism; putting a paybox on the front is trivial. An example of this
is Adobe Systems, shifting away from standalone software on a hard drive
to a subscription model that is managed via the cloud. This subscription
model is easily extensible to other media. Tablets are predisposed by
their architecture to favour payboxed systems of data access, in that
they are basically devices of media consumption. While tablets can be
used for media production, they are decidedly secondary and of limited
quality, and more integrated into the precarities of the online.

Tablets, cellphones, and similar devices are optimized for the
distribution of media commodities, not for copying and sharing media
from machine to machine. This architectural difference embodies the
neoliberal program of cultural economy, where culture is produced by an
industry for the consumption interests of an individual. This doesn’t
mean that tablets can never be used for file sharing – they are simply
optimized to act as a peripheral device to either a computer or the
cloud computing system. This is done, ostensibly, to limit battery use;
if a tablet had to power an external storage device, the amount of time
one could use the tablet on a single charge would be greatly limited.
The ancillary effect is their inherent sub-optimality as file sharing
devices. This of course feeds the needs of those ICT industries that are
increasingly vertically interwoven with media distribution, e.g.,
Apple’s integration of the iPad with the Apple Store, the Amazon Kindle,
etc., and so tablets, smartphones and similar devices are, from the
start, part and parcel of the same media consumption paradigm. The
expansion of tablets and mobile technology as nodes of media
distribution and consumption can be seen as a strategic ‘technological
fix’ for offline file sharing. Not so much as a direct action to counter
file sharing, but more as an ‘unintended’ strategic consequence of
energy optimization, interface design, and media distribution practices.

In terms of manipulating how people use technology, the broadest and
most powerful method is to act in terms of convenience. This is the
method of online streaming companies, used to undermine the value of the
file. In the late 1990s, the public had spent billions on CDs. With
Napster, people could share the songs they wanted to hear – it was
faster and more convenient than going to the store, buying the CD,
taking it home, finding that one particular song you want and then
ripping it to the computer for use on other devices. With streaming
technologies like Spotify, Rdio, and Pandora, the tide of convenience
has shifted even farther to the online, as these systems have millions
of instantly accessible songs. However, by streaming the data, the user
is herded into a data locker: access to the files themselves are only
available at a price, either outright or through advertisement and
datamining. The users cannot share the data – they can only share
references to that data, itself kept on hard drives in the service’s
server farms.

Amazon is doing much the same with e-books – one no longer ‘owns’ the
data, but merely rents it – even if the file is on one’s Kindle. A few
years ago, there was controversy over publishing rights of George
Orwell’s *1984*, and Amazon globally withdrew the book from all Kindle
readers – a chillingly ironic display of proprietarian prerogative and
force. [^bodytext-04_4] This shift from knowledge provision to
knowledge rental is a profound one, and one that a Personal Portable
Library directly refutes.

## THE END? NO END 

> And if I have a book to read\
>  If I have a block you need\
>  If you come to me and ask\
>  I'll share it with you.\
>
> Raffi (1976)

We teach songs about the virtues of sharing to our children, but we
can’t actually seem to find a way to let them live them. Property gets
in the way. The ability for people to share knowledge is under assault
by a variety of corporate and government entities, yet the need to share
knowledge is an innate human desire. The internet is no longer the
resilient and secure place its proponents have made it out to be – the
events in Egypt proved its fragility and precarity, while the Snowden
leaks regarding the NSA have proven that it is fundamentally insecure,
as the NSA basically records the actions of the internet in whole. The
only secure system for sharing information is now offline, a kind of
reversalist tactic to the ongoing dismantling of the online. Libraries
have always been at the forefront of this kind of change. Public
libraries that hold books made of paper are being made vulnerable and in
some cases obsolete by the advent of digital e-books – just as paper
displaced parchment, and parchment displaced papyrus. It is now feasible
to have a complete and very large library on a hard drive the size of a
pack of playing cards – indexed, searchable, and secure. These Personal
Portable Libraries are being copied, shared and distributed.

Offline libraries are fed by, and in turn, feed into, online systems –
thus the online is displaced and subsumed into hardware: there is no
‘online’, there is a condition of connectivity between storage systems
that creates the ‘online’ experience. As discussed, the Personal
Portable Library reaches back beyond the Sneakernet – recalling and
resurrecting the library practices of the ancients that were predicated
on the acquisition and copying of documents. The very existence of the
library depended on the ability to copy information from one substrate
to another, just as a computer exists by copying information from one
memory location to another. Inherent to this reversalism is free
information for and to all, open access to knowledge, and the sharing of
knowledge for the common good.

This brings into question different directions and systems of operation,
distinguished by the difference between metadata and indexing,
especially regarding Calibre. Metadata exists around a file, while
indexing manages the file itself. Metadata is lighter and easier than an
index, but less useful when one needs specific data. Metadata is better
for organizing files into semantic fields or objects – for example a
list of all books with tag X. But metadata doesn’t help find a
particular quote for research. Systems that do both would be optimal,
and that’s a direction worthy of development. However, since Calibre may
never integrate an indexing engine, Personal Portable Libraries could
simply use Calibre for organization and metadata, while using Dropout,
Lucene or similar apps for indexing of the collection.

Another great question centres on libgen. At present it is too big to
easily copy, only accessible online, and its database structure requires
php and mysql programming to make it work. It takes a few weeks to
download, days to set up, and a fairly high skill level in computer
programming. Still, it is not likely to go away and its book collection
is second to none, and if the San Antonio digital library were based
round a libgen node, it would be a much more interesting and valuable
library and not the techno-fetishist spectacle flash in the pan it is.
Libgen, found at libgen.org, is actually more useful than Google Books
and Google Scholar, as it provides access to the contents of books and
papers, and unlike Google allows downloading and copying of the
documents. However, as libgen’s indexing and presentation is primitive,
Google has the advantage of Query Based Research results.

With Google you can find the data, but to be able copy and paste, for
example, you’d have to take multiple screen shots in Adobe Acrobat Pro
and run the OCR command to turn the images into useful text data. In
that way, Google’s efforts combine the worst of both worlds – the
precarity and difficulty of the online and the limitations of print.
These limitations are understood and stipulated as common fact – they
are a product of copyright laws.

For these reasons, libgen is the most viable large-scale online digital
library system. Downloaded, it is the largest offline library. As
storage density increases over the next decade, all 12 or more TB of
libgen will eventually become easily portable. Indexed, libgen will
signal a shift to the next level of digital library science. How libgen
might operate in an offline capacity remains to be seen. Smaller
libraries, such as aaaaarg.org, can be downloaded and set up to be much
more viable directions of offline library development.

Resisting the precarities of the online and the encroachments of the
security state in a reversalism of older practices based in the
replication of knowledge substrates, the Personal Portable Library
propels us into a future beyond the sociopathic greed of proprietarian
regimes. Owning and managing a Personal Portable Library is more than
just good research practice – it’s a radical tactic of resistance
against informational feudalism, a strategy of dismantling proprietarian
theory, and an ennobling act of sharing the fruits of culture with all
for the good of all. May Metatron the Recording Angel protect and guide
us.

* * * * *

[^bodytext-04_1]:  Miguel Bustillo, ‘Library that Holds no Books’, *Wall Street
    Journal*, 6 February 2013,
    [http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324761004578286253988145208](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324761004578286253988145208).

[^bodytext-04_2]:  See Aaron Swartz’ family statement regarding his death: Owen Thomas,
    ‘Family of Aaron Swartz Blames MIT, Prosecutor For His Death’,
    *Business Insider*, 12 January 2013,
    [http://www.businessinsider.com/statement-family-aaron-swartz-2013-1](http://www.businessinsider.com/statement-family-aaron-swartz-2013-1).

[^bodytext-04_3]:  Dan Tynan, ‘The RIAA Knew SOPA and PIPA Were Useless yet Supported
    Them Anyway’, *ITWorld* , 29 July 2012,
    [http://www.itworld.com/it-managementstrategy/287788/riaa-knew-sopa-and-pipa-were-useless-against-piracy-and-supported-them-](http://www.itworld.com/it-managementstrategy/287788/riaa-knew-sopa-and-pipa-were-useless-against-piracy-and-supported-them-).
    ‘The industry knows that most music files are swapped offline, notes
    Torrent Freak.’ [↩]

[^bodytext-04_4]:  Brad Stone, ‘Amazon Erases Orwell Books From Kindle’, *The New York
    Times*, 17 July 2009,
    [http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html).

# References

Anderson, Nate. ‘PirateBox: An Artistic Provocation in Lunchbox Form’,
*Ars Technica*, 30 January 2011,
[http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/01/piratebox-an-artistic-provocation-in-lunchbox-form.ars](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/01/piratebox-an-artistic-provocation-in-lunchbox-form.ars).

Aron, Jacob. ‘PirateBox Lets You Share Files with Anyone Close by’, *New
Scientist*, 28 January 2011,
[http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2011/01/piratebox.html](http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2011/01/piratebox.html).

Battles, Matthew. *Library: An Unquiet History*, New York: W.W. Norton,
2003.

Benjamin, Walter. ‘Unpacking My Library’ in: *Illuminations*, New York:
Schocken Books, 1968.

Bogert, Nick. ‘Battered City of Gary, ID, Considers Shrinking 40 Percent
to Save Itself’, *NBC News*, 19 June 2013,
[http://inplainsight.nbcnews.com/\_news/2013/06/19/18956862-battered-city-of-gary-ind-considers-shrinking-40-percent-to-save-itself?lite](http://inplainsight.nbcnews.com/_news/2013/06/19/18956862-battered-city-of-gary-ind-considers-shrinking-40-percent-to-save-itself?lite).

Bradbury, Ray. *Fahrenheit 451*, New York: Ballantine Books, 1953.

Bustillo, Miguel. ‘Library that Holds no Books’, *Wall Street Journal*,
6 February 2013,
[http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324761004578286253988145208](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324761004578286253988145208).

Casson, Lionel. *Libraries in the Ancient World*, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2002.

CBC News. ‘Michael Jackson’s Doctor to Serve Halved Sentence’, *CBC
News*, 29 November 2011,
[http://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/story/2011/11/29/jackson-doctor-conrad.html](http://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/story/2011/11/29/jackson-doctor-conrad.html).

Cisco Systems. *Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and
Methodology*, 2012-2017,
[http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white\_paper\_c11-481360\_ns827\_Networking\_Solutions\_White\_Paper.html](http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-481360_ns827_Networking_Solutions_White_Paper.html).

Currie, Morgan. ‘Small is Beautiful, Interview with Sean Dockray’,
*Masters of Media blog*, 5 January 2010,
[http://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/2010/01/05/small-is-beautiful-a-discussion-with-aaaarg-architect-sean-dockray/](http://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/2010/01/05/small-is-beautiful-a-discussion-with-aaaarg-architect-sean-dockray/).

Darts, David. ‘David Darts: Pirate Box DIY Page’,
[http://wiki.daviddarts.com/PirateBox\_DIY](http://wiki.daviddarts.com/PirateBox_DIY).

Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari. *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and
Schizophrenia*, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 1987.

Delio, Michelle. ‘Patron Saint of the Nerds’, *Wired*, 4 October 2011,
[http://archive.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2004/11/65184](http://archive.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2004/11/65184).

Doctorow, Cory. ‘Edward Snowden: “The NSA Set Fire to the Internet. You
Are the Firefighters”’, *The Guardian*, 11 March 2014,
[http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/11/edward-snowden-sxsw-nsa-internet](http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/11/edward-snowden-sxsw-nsa-internet).

Drahos, Peter and John Braithwaite. *Information Feudalism: Who Owns the
Information Economy?*New York: The New Press, 2002.

Dredge, Stuart. ‘Julian Assange Tells SXSW Audience: “NSA has grown to
be a rogue agency”’, *The Guardian,*8 March 2014,
[http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/08/julian-assange-wikileaks-nsa-sxsw](http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/08/julian-assange-wikileaks-nsa-sxsw).

Drogin, Mark. *Medieval Calligraphy: Its History and Technique*, New
York: Dover, 1989.

Dumper, Michael and Bruce E. Stanley (eds) *Cities of the Middle East
and North Africa: A Historical Encyclopedia*, Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO,
2007.

Ernesto. ‘RIAA: Online Music Piracy Pales in Comparison to Offline
Swapping’, *TorrentFreak*, 26 July 2012,
[http://torrentfreak.com/riaa-online-music-piracy-pales-in-comparison-to-offline-swapping-120726/](http://torrentfreak.com/riaa-online-music-piracy-pales-in-comparison-to-offline-swapping-120726/).

Fakhouri, Hani. ‘Arab Spring Revolution and Rise of Religious
Sectarianism’, *Mid East Today*, 12 April 2012,
[http://mid-east-today.blogspot.ca/2012/04/arab-spring-revolution-and-rise-of.html](http://mid-east-today.blogspot.ca/2012/04/arab-spring-revolution-and-rise-of.html).

Gottesdiener, Laura. ‘“Why Do Oppressed People Have such Great Jokes?”
The Yes Men’s Andy Bichlbaum’, *Waging Non Violence*, 23 April 2012,
[http://wagingnonviolence.org/2012/04/why-do-oppressed-people-have-such-great-jokes-the-yes-mens-andy-bichlbaum/](http://wagingnonviolence.org/2012/04/why-do-oppressed-people-have-such-great-jokes-the-yes-mens-andy-bichlbaum/).

Guiley, Rosemary Ellen. *The Encyclopedia of Saints*, New York: Facts On
File, 2001.

Jensen, Derrick and Aric McBay. *What We Leave Behind*, New York: Seven
Stories Press, 2009.

Kelty, Christopher. ‘The Disappearing Virtual Library’, *Al Jazeera*, 1
March 2012,
[http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/02/2012227143813304790.html](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/02/2012227143813304790.html).

Mucunguzi, Albert. ‘Makerere University Business School (MUBS) Receives
50,000 eBooks’, *PC Tech*, 5 December 2012,
[http://pctechmag.com/2012/12/makerere-university-business-school-mubs-receives-50000-eBooks/](http://pctechmag.com/2012/12/makerere-university-business-school-mubs-receives-50000-eBooks/).

Scannell, Beth. *Life on the Border: Cyberspace and the Frontier in
Historical Perspective*,
[http://www.kether.com/words/thesis/index.html](http://www.kether.com/words/thesis/index.html).

Stone, Brad. ‘Amazon Erases Orwell Books from Kindle’, *The New York
Times*, 17 July 2009,
[http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html).

Swartz, Aaron. *The Guerilla Open Access Manifesto*, 2008,
[http://archive.org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008\_djvu.txt](http://archive.org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008_djvu.txt).

Tanenbaum, Andrew S. *Computer Networks*, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,
1996.

Telekommunisten. ‘deadSwap’,
[http://deaddrops.com/deadswap/](http://deaddrops.com/deadswap/).

Thomas, Owen. ‘Family of Aaron Swartz Blames MIT, Prosecutor For His
Death’, *Business Insider*, 12 January 2013,
[http://www.businessinsider.com/statement-family-aaron-swartz-2013-1](http://www.businessinsider.com/statement-family-aaron-swartz-2013-1).

Tynan, Dan. ‘The RIAA Knew SOPA and PIPA Were Useless yet Supported Them
Anyway’, *ITWorld*, 29 July 2012,
[http://www.itworld.com/it-managementstrategy/287788/riaa-knew-sopa-and-pipa-were-useless-against-piracy-and-supported-them-](http://www.itworld.com/it-managementstrategy/287788/riaa-knew-sopa-and-pipa-were-useless-against-piracy-and-supported-them-)

World Bank. *Poverty and Inequality Database*,
[http://data.worldbank.org/products/data-books/WDI-2008](http://data.worldbank.org/products/data-books/WDI-2008).

Yurick, Sol. *Behold Metatron: The Recording Angel*, New York:
Semiotext(e), 1985.





